REPORT OF SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

TO THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND: 

THE SUB - COMMITTEE HAS INSPECTED THE MINUTES OF THE

February 27, 2017

MEETING OF THE COUNCIL AND FOUND THEM TO BE CORRECT. 

THEREFORE, WE RECOMMEND THE SAME BE APPROVED: 

TIM SCOTT

A VARNER

APPROVED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL ON: 

March 27,  2017

ATTEST: 

4 -

Z5-

r- //wz: 

EMAH FOWLElt, CITY CLERK

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27 2017

Be itremembered that the Common Council ofthe City ofSouth Ben
Council Chambers ofthe County -City Building on Monday, February
The meeting was called to order by Council President Tim Scott and the
Reverend Dr. ChristinaRea, Church ofthe Savior CRC and Pledge t he Invocation was given by

2017 at 7:O p In

d'  Indiana met .

o the Flag was given. 

g

the

0

ROLL CALL

COUNCIL MEMBERS: 

Regina Williams- Preston
Randy Kelly
Jo M. Broden
Dr. David Varner
Oliver J.  Davis
John Voorde
Gavin Ferlic
Karen L. White

ABSENT- 

Tim Scott

OTHERS PRESENT: 

Kareemah Fowler
Jennifer Coffman
Alkeyna Aldridge
Graham Sparks
Aladean DeRose
Adriana Rodriguez

2 °d District
3rd District
4`h District
5th District
6`h District, Vice President
At -Large
At- Large, Chairperson Committee ofthe Whole

At -Large

I"  District, President

City Clerk
Chief Deputy Clerk
Deputy Clerk
Executive Assistant Clerk
Interim Council Attorney
Legal Research Assistant

REPORTFROM THE SUB- COMMITTEE ON MINUTES
Due to the absence ofCouncil President Tim Scott, therewas no quorum in
minutes of the February 13 `h 2017 meeting of the Council

on Minutes. The
be accepted

until the Common Council meeting on March 13`h 2

017. 

the Sub -Co
mmittn
therefore, would not

SPECIAL BUSINESS
There was no special business this evening. 

REPORTS OF CITY OFFICES
Representing the City Administration: 

James Mueller, Chief of Staff

RESOLVE INTO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE
At 7Q m Councilmember Karen White made a motion to resolve into
Whole. Councilmember Dr. David V
eight (8)  ayes.  Councilmember Gavin

Varner

Chairperson, presiding. 

the Committee of the
which carried by a voice vote of

1

REGULAR MEETING

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic

accordance with Article 1,  Section 2 -11 ofthe South Bendh

explained the procedures

to be

FEBRUARY 27 2017

for tonight' s meeting in

Code. 

PUBLIC HEARINGS

02 -17

PUBLIC HEARR G ON AN ORDINANCE
AMENDING TH ZON1NCp ONAFOR AND
SEEKING A SP CIAL EX
PROPERTY LOCATED AT S 1 ETRE
LOCATED ALONG EDDY
WEST SIDE OF OEONIAND HOWARD, 
BETWEEN NA
COUNCILMA C DISTRICT No. 4 IN THE
CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

TRACT

Building, 

served as the presenter

Councilmember OliverDavis, Chair ofthe Zoning and Annexation Committee, reported that
they metthis afternoon and send thisbill forward withafavorable recommendation* 
Commission, with offices on the d that the petitionernis seeking to
Angela Smith, Area Plan
rezone the ten (10)  acres highlighted on the map p
the area south of
east and the alley
3)  zoning districts on the property: 

Georgianacurrently three
1VIF1,  SF1,  and MU, M "xed -Use. The petitioner is seeking to
Street Phase Two (2) 
the development to the north. The
rimg structure within the petition area. Ms. Smith
public'  another from St. 

between Eddy Street and Frances Street on the west. 
development to MU, Mixed -Use, lement

of Howard Street, bettytThee

of this bill. Ms. Smith stated

resented to the Council and p

development, a Mixed -Use

Napoleon Boulevard, north

development th

ublic, constituting

e the entire

rezone

at

aside from one O

Doug Kirby, Kite Realty Group, 30 South Meridian
bill. Mr. Kirby exi
on behalf of the petitioner of
d be used for
the development, stating
well as being flexible enough to be residential. He
Georgiana Street would be committed to being two
with Notre Dame University and the surrounding c' 

they

2

andcaother looking
acre site with five (5) 

north from

distinct

retail establishment, 

depicted for the Council and public

1

depicted n reds
rkng structureLland

P

floor

service

same mix of flex space and

townhomes to be

built

site is mostly vacant, 

presented

ted a view of the property
looking

Streetto th

from Howard
south from Georgian

development is a ten 10

Vincent Street, an
Georgiana Street. She stated that the
blocks. Block A is in the northwest
for the Council and public. The remaining property, 
and orange, isMixed Use with either a flex or residential
family residential above the remainder ofthe floor. There is a self -sere

Block B con ins the

rant. It contains

space on the

quadrant- 

y

in the rear along the alley. 

as Detached

Single-Family,  which

Blocks A and B are proposedhe

Residential along Eddy Street. The p
Street. The special exception in question this evening

some courtyards
Multi- Family
on Georgiana
them to do those townllomes
Mixed -Use District. 
those fronting on Georgiana Street. Having
the forty (40)  foot height limit of the zoning or
Block C, while Block D has garages
development but adds the Robinson Community Learning
location. The entire development
Smith stated, This comes to you from the AreaPlan Commission wit
the second phase of Eddy Street Commons, 

Residential with a subsurface p king

property to MU, Mixed -
P p

recommendation. Rezoning

Multi - Family

would be a

development

primarily

dinance

Mixed

which

r

complements and supports

the existing

etitio er is proposing

addresses the ability for
is a specialhthe exception of
by oance, they would have to comply
MU, Mixed -Use. Block C and
in the courtyard to the rear of

4 stories, with

1 with

are

U, 

with surface parki g. Block E continues that same

Center as a rebuild from
continuation of Eddy Street arofavorable

the existing

1).  Ms. 

Use, will allow for ehdevelopm
provide a Mixed Us
g
d surrounding

hborhood. 

neighborhood. 

development that

c _.

f Suite 1100, Indianapolis, IN, served
ded on the function of the flex units of
Ltiques or galleries or for small service, as
d that the Single - Family units on
stories. The petitioner' s party worked
n„ n; ties to come up with

the project in its

g
o
REGULAR MEETIN

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

current form. Mr. Kirby stated that the petitioner' s aim was to compliment the neighborhood as
well as what has been established by Phase One ( 1)  of the Eddy Street Commons project. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in favor of this bill: 

Tim Sexton, Associate Vice President for Public Affairs at the University of Notre Dame, 405
Main Building, Notre Dame,  IN, stated that the University elected to have Kite work on Phase
Two ( 2)  of the Eddy Street Commons project, as they had worked on Phase One ( 1).  Mr. Sexton
explained that Kite Realty was in dialogue with community residents through the Harter Heights
listserv, the Northeast Neighborhood Council, the Northeast Neighborhood Revitalization
Organization, and the Triangle Homeowners Association. He expressed appreciation toward Kite
Realty for having thorough communication with the community and stated that the University
fully endorsed the current plan for Eddy Street Commons Phase Two ( 2). 

Paul Meyer, NNRO and South Bend Clinic, 211 North Eddy Street,  South Bend, IN, stated that
this project aims to raise the quality of life and the quality of the residential aspects of the
community while bringing economic benefit to the entire community. Mr. Meyer stated,  It
combines the opportunity to live, work, and play in one ( 1)  neighborhood. Mr. Meyer also
lauded Kite Realty' s engagement with the community and expressed approval for the project on
behalf of the Northeast Neighborhood Revitalization Organization. 

Jessica McCray,  1104 Duey Avenue,  South Bend,  IN, expressed the endorsement of the project
by the Triangle Homeowners Association. Ms. McCray stated that the community felt itself
heard in the dialogues with Kite Realty, further commending the group' s community

engagement. 

Richard Pierce, University of Notre Dame and Robinson Community Learning Center,  1210 East
Wayne Street, South Bend, IN, stated that the Robinson Community Learning Center Board
unanimously endorses the project. 

Mary Williams, 601 East Howard Street,  South Bend, IN, stated that the Robinson Community
Learning Center has been a great pillar to the neighborhood and community, expressing gratitude
for all the opportunities that the Center offers children of the area.  She concluded by stating, 
Without the Center, I don' t know what my family would have done. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in opposition to this bill: 

S. J.  Szabo,  with offices on Mishawaka Avenue,  South Bend,  IN, stated that the urban
development in the Eddy Street Commons is ill- placed and saps energy from downtown South
Bend. Mr. Szabo stated,  The neighbors may have come to terms with it, but the City never will. 
It will suffer always because of it. 

Jessica Payne,  1119 North Francis Street, South Bend, IN, stated that the Eddy Street Commons
project has so far been for Notre Dame students and their enjoyment rather than to the benefit of
the area' s community. Ms. Payne cited early parking concerns,  arguing that many people hesitate
to pay for a parking spot in the garage.  She also cited early concerns with the establishment of a
bar in the area.  She stated, This is far from a great live /work type of community.  I had that, 
actually, before Eddy Street came about.  Ms. Payne stated that what used to be a quiet and
peaceful neighborhood has become one where she hears nothing but the yelling of Eddy Street
patrons at night who park in the neighborhood instead of the garage.  She stated that if there are
no measures to mitigate the parking problem included in the language of the bill, that the Council
would be writing off a large portion of a neighborhood " that has been there long before Notre
Dame ever thought to spread its wings beyond its boundaries." 

Doug Kirby returned to the podium and stated that the southern blocks ( C,  D, E)  will primarily
be focused on rentals for graduate students of the University of Notre Dame.  Mr. Kirby further
stated that the parking problem in the area most likely predates the Eddy Street Commons and is
an issue that should most likely be resolved on the City level. 

3

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

Councilmember Karen White stated that during that afternoon' s
Committee meeting, the Administration had proposed possible
concerns.  Councilmember White requested that these propositic

ping and Annexation
s to address parking
be made a part of the record. 

Brian Pawlowski, the Department of Community Investment, with offices on the 14th Floor of
the County -City Building, stated that there is a traffic study under way that will not only take
into account parking but traffic flow in the area. Mr. Pawlowski explained that since Phase Two
2)  would not be as retail- focused but rather more residential- focused, retail activity of Eddy
Street Commons Phase One ( 1)  would not be mirrored in the Ph se Two (2)  portion of the site. 
The planned underground and surface garages would primarily accommodate residents rather
than patrons. He stated, But, should permanent parking still be an option, we explored this with
the area around Four Winds Fields. It' s a simple procedure. You go to the Board of Public
Works— there' s a traffic cite that' s done there to count cars who need it for residential and other
parking. Provided the numbers are met, the Board would approve a special permitted use in that
zone that would be laid out. 

I

1

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked when the Department of Cc
able to report back regarding the results of the traffic study. Cot
when it would be decided if this should go before Public Works

nunity Investment would be
ilmember Davis also asked

approve permit parking. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded that the results from the traffic study
1)  month. He stated,  If there is concern that the residential wot
on -site and there may be overflow necessary, we can then prod

uld be available within one
not be able to be taken care of
down the public permitting

route. 

i

Councilmember Davis asked,  So,  we would have all of our
in advance, before this is developed —is that correct? 

all of our information well

Mr. Pawlowski responded, We are doing this all now in conjun, 
engineering and the preliminary work that is being done for the
one ( 1) 

issue.  So,  there is a lot of work yet to do. 

with the rest of the

of the site, not just this

Councilmember Davis asked how the Council and nei
progress toward having residential parking permits. 

would be made aware of the

Mr. Pawlowski responded that all findings from the traffic stuc
the Department of Community Investment can provide the Col
share that information. He stated,  Should there be a need for sc
notices for the Board of Works Meeting —where anyone can c
would be posted, but that is another thing that we can send to t
make your constituents aware of that meeting time and date,  a] 
involved in any way. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden asked if the DCI would follow - 
one ( 1)  after the project has been completed, and also asked at
much community engagement is involved in it. 

will be posted online, and that

il with the means to access and
e type of permit parking, the
ie and speak on that matter — 
Council in the form of a link to
the process,  if they wanted to be

their current traffic study with
t the focus of the study and how

Mr. Pawlowski responded that the determination of whether or of there is a need for additional
street or other parking can be made by the community in a Town Hall setting. Regarding the
parking study, the DCI is trying to take into account things like how retail use affects the traffic. 
Mr. Pawlowski explained, Just using ballpark numbers of existing traffic and then adding a bit
on top of that to come to a conclusion about what we think some traffic flow would be in there, 
and determining whether or not that space should be utilized. 

Councilmember Broden asked how " unneighborly behavior"  could be addressed by the City. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded,  We have been fortunate to have a very good relationship with the
Police Chief as well as the officers that work that beat at various portions of the day. They come
to the neighborhood organization meetings, they are frequently seen out of their vehicles
interacting with folks in the neighborhood.  So,  we hope to continue that. Mr. Pawlowski stated
that should there be any issues that pop up in areas of specific concern, the DCI would get in
contact with the Police Chief to get targeted reinforcement in those areas,  if that action made the

M

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

most sense for the situation. He stated that the City has not yet seen the need for that, except in
the case of particular Saturdays of the year. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly asked, If the study shows that there is plenty of capacity, is there
still some way we can look at something like permanent parking that can mitigate that issue? 
Mr. Pawlowski responded that aside from capacity was the issue of proximity. He stated,  If it' s
basically that the use is kind of crowding out folks who have residential uses in that particular
space, there is a case to be made with the Board of Public Works that we should implement
permanent parking. Sometimes, time limits are used so that we can be open at some times and
more restricted at others.  This was specifically thought of in that example. 

Councilmember Broden asked if there were ways to incentivize garage parking. 
Mr. Pawlowski responded, In between the committee meeting and now, someone made a
suggestion to just increase signage for the public further out, not just within the actual space in
front of the retail that we have. So,  I think first and foremost we should do that. He stated that
certain times and hours could be more susceptible to increased incentives. 

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to send Bill No. 02 -17 to the full Council favorably, 
subject to and conditioned upon the written commitment that the portion of the real estate
abutting Georgiana Street be developed for two (2)  story residential and open space use. 
Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 

ayes. 

03 -17

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE
AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE AND
SEEKING A SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT 3566 DOUGLAS
ROAD,  COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 4 IN
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember Randy Kelly made a motion to continue Bill No. 03. 17 indefinitely. 
Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 

ayes. 

08 -17

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE
INITIATED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 
AMENDING CHAPTER 21,  ARTICLE 3, 
SECTION 21 -03 OF THE SOUTH BEND
MUNICIPAL CODE BY ADDING A NEW SUB- 
PART 21- 03. 06( b)( 4)( C)  TO INCREASE THE
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT PERMITTED
IN CBD DISTRICTS LOCATED BETWEEN THE
ST.  JOSEPH RIVER AND THE EAST RACE
WATERWAY

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to accept Substitute Bill No. 08 -17.  Councilmember
John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis, Chair of the Zoning and Annexation Committee, reported that
they met this afternoon and send this bill forward with no recommendation. 

Angela Smith, Area Plan Commission, with offices on the 11 th Floor of the County -City
Building, served as the presenter of this bill. Ms.  Smith stated, The text amendment before you
this evening is to address the height within the Central Business District, specifically in the area
commonly referred to as " the Island."  The Island is defined as the area that is east of the St. 
Joseph River but west of the East Race Waterway. The proposed text amendment would not
affect the heights in the area west of the St. Joseph River, or the heights of the Central Business
District properties located on the east side of the East Race Waterway. The proposed text
amendment would increase the height within the Island to one - hundred and fifty (15 0)  feet, with

E

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

no reference to stories. This comes to you from

Area Plan Coilninission with a favorable

recommendation. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis, 6th District, 1801 Nash Street, Sou h Bend, IN, served as the
petitioner of this bill. Councilmember Davis stated that back in 2008,  South Bend was
considered a dying city; that back in 2009, no one would have an icipated the kinds of
development that have happened in the City since. He stated that developers have been looking
to build past the current sixty (60)  foot limit in that area. He stated that he did not feel that the
role of the Council was merely to enforce limitations on develop ent, but to see how they could
encourage it in the City. It is his hope that increasing the height limit to one - hundred and fifty
15 0)  feet will do that. He explained that shadow problems regar ling the Commerce Center
PUD, for instance, were mostly an issue when its height was set
170)  feet, and that apartment residents in the area responded beti er to the height when it was
brought down to nine ( 9)  stories. He stated that he was thankful 16 be able to bring this
amendment before the Council and public. 

t over one - hundred and seventy

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic stated, This ordinance is in response to community demand as well
as neighborhood demand, especially from neighbors in the Howird Park neighborhood and
neighbors who live in close proximity. This fits within the vast majority of the Comprehensive
Plan which calls for mixed -use,  increased density,  amenities sucl,i as restaurants and grocery
stores and pharmacies. Unfortunately, to this point, mixed -use development has not been able to
occur on the Island with the current sixty (60)  foot restriction and the only proposed mixed -use
developments have exceeded that sixty (60)  foot requirement. In order to achieve the vision for
the Comprehensive Plan and to achieve mixed -use development, to achieve density, to achieve
amenities such as retail and restaurants and grocery stores and pharmacies —we think that this
amendment provides the best opportunity for the vision for the omprehensive Plan to be

achieved. 

unity Investment, with offices
Tim Corcoran, Director of Planning for the Department of Co
on the 141 Floor of the County -City Building, South Bend, IN,  ated that the City supports this
text amendment. Mr. Corcoran stated that the City worked closely with Councilmembers to
come up with the text amendment and the new height limit. He stated, Fundamentally, the City
sees the Island as an extension to the City' s core. It should be noted that there are a few buildings
on the west side of the river that exceed the one - hundred and fifty (15 0)  foot height limit, 
including the building that we are in. So, when we talk about how the City form can happenthe
taller buildings being on the west side of the river and gradiating down to the east —this is
exactly what this plan will continue to allow us to do. It also allows for developers to be flexible
in how they develop their buildings so that they do not have to build all the way up to the one - 
hundred and fifty (150)  feet. They can choose to gradiate and differentiate height between
different parts of one ( 1)  building or different buildings together to create a more interesting
skyline. Together, those things are part of the reason why we, 
a good idea for this text amendment. 

th the Council, thought this was

Councilmember Davis explained, using the modification of an old lasagna recipe as analogy, that
the City did not have to be stuck with the exact plan set in 2008. He stated, It was a good plan, in
2008,  but now, as we see developers coming up with some new ideas, I don' t want to get stuck
with the same ingredients of 2008. He encouraged the Council to embrace this update to the plan. 
Councilmember Karen White asked Interim Council Attorney Aladean DeRose if the Area Plan
Commission had requested the text amendment, in response to which Interim Council Attorney
DeRose clarified that the Area Plan Commission reviewed the original amendment that the
Council had supported and submitted,  and did so in accordance with the way the zoning
ordinance is laid out. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be hearc.. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in favor of this bill: 

Jesse Davis, P.O. Box 10205,  South Bend, IN, stated that he
for the City and the people of South Bend, expressing that he

this amendment as a win -win
es the Council supports it. 

ON

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 2017

Mary Bundy, President of the Howard Park Neighborhood Association, 318 South Francis
Street, South Bend, IN, stated that there has been a lot of dialogue for a long time about this issue
and that, given this fact, she was glad that the issue had not been talked to death. Ms. Bundy
stated, I think that if we can continue to pass ordinances and laws and regulations that allow and
encourage growth— rather than squash it and talk it to death —I think the City is on the right
path, and I' m very happy to be a citizen of South Bend. I hope you will all stand together and
pass this. 

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street, South Bend,  IN, stated that he did not feel that the
desire to distinguish between the east and west of the river was a good reason to stop progress. 
Mr. Brown stated that a bad project should be denied, but that a good project should not be
turned down so easily due to something like a height issue.  He stated, I hope tonight that we put
it to sleep,  once and for all, and let this project go through. 

Ryan Snodgrass, 416 25th Street,  South Bend, IN, stated that it was a great idea to get a grocery
store in the downtown area and that a lot of cities around the country would kill to have that kind
of development going on in their downtown. He put forth the idea that this could be the catalyst
for greater development in the City. 

Charlene Rountree, 401 Woodknoll Drive, Granger, IN, stated that she moved to the area from
Central Indiana in 2009, and that back then she was told by a lot of people that South Bend was a
city in decline and that young professionals should not move there. Ms. Rountree stated that if
South Bend is to grow as a metropolitan area, it would be inevitable that buildings grow taller. 
She stated, I would be more worried about what you attract to the area by continuing to grow. 
Myron Larimer, 402 East South Street, South Bend, IN, stated that anything that can be done to
encourage growth and development while taking into consideration the needs of local residents is
a win -win. He views the allowance for more development in downtown South Bend that will
meet various needs as a " slam dunk." 

Those from the public wishing to speak in opposition to the bill: 

S. J.  Szabo, with offices on Mishawaka Avenue,  South Bend, IN, stated that the East Race
neighborhood, in its current configuration, serves a vital function in the overall plan of the City
in that it provides a transition zone between the downtown across the river and the residential
area on the east side. Mr. Szabo argued that a large building like the Commerce Center PUD is
not the only project through which that neighborhood could get a grocery store.  He stated that
tall developments should remain on the other side of the river. He urged the Council to " think
beyond today, beyond the demands of the greedy Mr. Matthews,  and consider the fabric ofthe
City to be what you are in consideration of, today." 

Steve Francis, 2025 Edison Road, South Bend, IN, stated that he is unequivocally in support of
development in South Bend, as he was when he participated in the drawing up of the
Comprehensive Plan. Mr. Francis stated that this process looks nothing like an open participatory
process. He stated, When this went from a project -based zoning variance of some kind to
changing the zoning ordinance, you reset the process. Mr. Francis took issue with the fact that
only one ( 1)  discussion changed the Area Plan Commission' s vote from one ( 1)  without a
recommendation to the eight ( 8)  necessary votes to give a favorable recommendation. He warned
that the Council would have less ground with which to say no to developers on account of height, 
going forward. He urged the Council to consider deeply the potential consequences of making
this change to the ordinance. 

Michael Lykoudis,  17583 Ironstone Drive, South Bend, IN, stated that he has been part of the
process of envisioning South Bend for the past twenty -five (25)  years and that he has seen it
through its many changes. Mr. Lykoudis stated,  Cities are not food. They are cities. We live in
them,  and we don' t treat them like we treat food. Mr. Lykoudis pointed out that there has been
no marketing or architectural feasibility studies done for the Commerce Center PUD that this
amendment opens the door for. He stated that these studies need to be done before the project
goes ahead,  and that the developer has in the past demonstrated a sensitivity to the character of
the City, but with smaller projects, on a scale that resonates with South Bend' s vision. He
concluded, I would like to urge you, the Council and the City, to work with the developer to set

7

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 201

high aspirations for this project, which, along with'the whole development of the Island, has the
potential to really transform and be a great success story. But bac it up with compelling
architectural and realistic economic vision that will continue the uccessful trajectory of the
development of the past few years. 
Marge McKinsey, 719 West Washington Street, South Bend, IN, stated that the development
blights on the west side of the river should not be replicated on the east side and that if the
Commerce Center PUD project fails, " We will have an even worse blight on the area."  Ms. 
McKinsey advocates design that makes for an attractive environment instead of building for
building' s sake. She stated that extra height could be afforded on the East Bank but not on the
Island, as the buildings of importance there would be overshadowed by newer, taller
development. She concluded by urging the Council to listen to Mr. Lykoudis'  counsel. 
Rolanda Hughes,  1029 Riverside Drive, South Bend, IN, stated that she feels the public has been
one ( 1)  project but " lets
put in a difficult position, as the text amendment does not simplylI,
loose something completely other."  Ms. Hughes contended that die amendment would transform
the low -rise character of the Island into a wall of high -rise builds gs.  Focusing on the Commerce
Center PUD, she called into question the parking needs of the project, given that the petitioner
has stated that the project is proposed at its great height to justify the need for a parking garage. 
Comparing the proposed number of parking spaces of the project to existing parking lots, like
that of the current Commerce Center and Martin' s stores comparable to the one ( 1) 
proposed PUD, Ms. Hughes concluded that the project could cut up to one - hundred and eighty
180)  parking spaces. At that point, the proposed height of the Commerce Center project would
be unnecessary. She concluded by stating that if the text amendment passes, she would like to
see the $5, 000, 000 the City granted to the project be returned to  he City' s funds. 
Karen Schefineyer, 300 South St. Louis Boulevard, South Bend, IN, stated that the plan for one- 
hundred and fifty (150)  feet is very high. Ms. Schefineyer stated that whatever is done to the
Howard Park area will affect the East Bank and vice versa. She tated that the height of any
building in the area east ofthe river should not exceed the height of church steeples.  She stated, 
That was the goal. It was never to have a hundred and fifty (150)  feet, especially along the river. 
You' re going to screw up the views. She urged the Council tot
decision and to consider it a decision with impact beyond one -h ndred ( 100)  years. 

e their time in making this

in the

Glenn Bennett asked how many acres the Island occupies, in res onse to which Councilmember
Gavin Ferlic explained that the Council does not answer questions in this portion of the Public
Hearing. Mr. Bennett asked what measures would be in place to fight against erosion caused by
the St. Joseph River. He stated that unless the Island occupies m ore than five (5)  or ten ( 10) 
acres,  should the ground on the Island get wet from heavy rain, it will turn to " mush."  He stated, 
When it turns to mush, what have you got? You' ve got a disaster waiting to happen. 
Michalen Maternowski, 308 Parkovash Avenue,  South Bend, IN, stated that Mr. Francis and Mr. 
Lykoudis expressed the main concerns that she had with the ordinance change, and she echoed
their recommendation to the Council to consider the matter more carefully and slowly. 

Leah McLaughlin, 1120 Georgiana Street, South Bend, IN, stated that Paris, France —one of the
most beautiful cities in the world- --does not have massive build 'ngs along its riverfront. Ms. 
McLaughlin stated, If you put a lot of money or investment in t e riverfront, a hundred and fifty
15 0)  foot building makes no sense. 

as a transitional part of the
Councilmember Gavin Ferlic stated that, regarding the East Ba
City, it would make sense for buildings over one - hundred and fifty (150)  feet to reside on the
West Bank, buildings one - hundred and fifty (150)  feet and under to reside on the Island, then
buildings sixty (60) feet and under in the rest of the Central Business District, followed by lower
heights in the residential area. Councilmember Ferlic also stated that the emails and phone
calls —from residents in the area in question —were overwhel
Center project. 

ngly in favor of the Commerce

Councilmember Oliver Davis stated that an outside consultant was brought in when developing
the Comprehensive Plan, adding, " And we belie ed him."  Councilmember Davis stated that
when local businessmen like Rob Bartels believe in a local development project, it is for a good

8

l
a
d
d
r
e
s
s
REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

reason, and their insight is valuable. He stated, We have to look at what our plans are and respect
tradition, but at the same time we have to make sure that we move forward. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston stated, I think that it' s important to remember —and
people have said it tonightthat this is not about the Commerce Center development;  it' s not
about one ( 1)  project. This is about a larger issue:  about changing the height for the entire area. I
think that makes it harder for me to vote for...  Now, by saying, " Okay, we' re just going to let
everybody do it," that to me is even harder to say yes to.  Councilmember Williams- Preston
pointed out that the Council could not be too slow in making their decision because the Regional
Cities grant of $5, 000,000 is only available for a limited time.  She stated that this is an issue
where a deeper look at process is necessary. She stated,  We could have done it —I don' t know
that we have time now to do that anymore —but we could have done it months ago,  and we have
just not gone that route. Councilmember Williams- Preston concluded by stating, I would like us
to think about the possibility of maybe an amendment to this text amendment, and then maybe I
could support it. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly stated, Unlike Ms. Williams- Preston, I like this in that it levels the
playing field in that area so that everybody is working under the same set of criteria. I have a
great deal of respect for Mr. Lykoudis and his work, and he certainly brought up some valid
points, but at the same time - 2008 was the East Bank Plan.  One of the first lines in the East
Bank Plan is that, " because there has been no development in this area for the past decade,  we
feel the need to do this plan."  So,  now we' re talking about twenty (20)  years where very little has
been done. While this is big and different for that area, a nine ( 9)  story building doesn' t strike
me, personally, as a monolith. To that end, I will be supporting this. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden stated that she is glad that the discussion has finally concerned
itself with the height limit for the area as a whole rather than for a single project. Councilmember
Broden stated that the discussion is difficult to have because the issue has been undiscussed for
months, not talked about effectively for years,  nor has it been worked on for years.  She stated
that those involved in the making of the Comprehensive Plan looked at every conceivable angle
while developing the plan. The plan was based on input, but not just opinions, nor simply
academics.  She stated,  It' s just got to work. Councilmember Broden stated that the plan should
guide how the City spends money on infrastructure or how the City " tees -up"  projects.  She stated
that the notion that nothing has developed in the East Bank Village is false.  She stated that the
area is in the middle of redevelopment,  despite economic pressures left over from the Recession. 

Councilmember Broden pointed out that Councilmembers should know the acreage of the Island; 
that they should know that in 2014 there were problems with digging too deeply into the earth of
the Island —which is surrounded by two (2)  bodies of water; that they should know that if a
developer digs more deeply into the ground to erect a taller building, " you are going to increase
your cost of construction exponentially. And if the developer can' t do it, the ticket is going to hit
us as citizens of South Bend."  Councilmember Broden then listed investments in the area:  the

Seitz Park expansion; the streetscape projects;  the construction of townhomes and apartments; 
facade improvements on Jefferson Street;  Smart Streets;  the park bond;  the Pokagon investment. 
She stated, All of these things, whether they are happening or whether they are soon to come
online, they exist because of a vision and they exist because of a plan.  She referenced a bill
entitled `Adopting a Text Amendment to the South Bend Central Development Area Plan'  from
2013,  on file with the Office of the City Clerk.  She asked,  You know what is talked about in this, 
signed by our Mayor and members of the Redevelopment Commission? "Protect this unique
asset." " Don' t build buildings up to the water' s edge."  We have water' s edge on both sides,  here. 
These are goals for my District and for this neighborhood and for the people that I am charged to
represent.  So,  we cannot simply dismiss the 2008 plan and say that it' s dead, because as recently
as 2013,  we reaffirmed the same visions that are in this plan. Councilmember Broden stated that
there should be a desire to change the plan after many developers come to the Council asking for
the same thing that the plan does not allow for, over and over. She stated, There is a case,  there is
a fact trail, there is a history of people asking you the same thing. There is not a fact trail here, 
there is not a history. There are four (4)  projects that haven' t even asked to go beyond the sixty
60)  foot height limit. Where is the data? Where is the information that supports this change? 
Absent that, why would we ignore plan? Why would we ignore subsequent decisions by previous

G 

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

Administrations, by previous Development Co
South Bend —why would we ignore that? 

fissions,  by pr vious planners for the City of

Councilmember Broden then referenced another document, `Design Guidelines 2013',  on file
with the Office of the City Clerk. She stated that in June 2014, a project came before the Area
Board of Zoning Appeals, then the Area Plan Commission, and eventually the Council, and the
Council found a way to make that project work. A policy was drawn up, allowing for height
variances in the East Bank Central Business District for up to eight ( 8)  stories, or ninety -six (96) 
feet. In order to gain the City' s support, though, such a project must provide for a public amenity
and pedestrian scale fagade treatments for the first two (2)  storie as written commitments. 
Councilmember Broden stated,  So,  we have an active policy on he books,  publicly announced, 
and that people have made investment decisions upon for this ama. Councilmember Broden
stated, I urge all of us not to turn our backs on the planners and,  ankly, not to let this evening' s
event —where we are talking about something bigger than a prof ct —be short circuited or
truncated. Our community deserves more, my district deserves more, and the people all over
South Bend deserve more. 

I

Councilmember Broden referenced the report of Torti Gallas, the consultant hired in late
November of 2016, which she stated she would submit by the e d of the evening.  She stated, He
said it can be done. You can get mixed -use development here th t is sustainable at ninety -six
96)  feet. Councilmember Broden stated that very little has been entered into the public record to
substantiate the need for the additional height that would be all
amendment. She stated that a decision in favor of this amendment should be a decision made
with a real economic benefit to the City in mind. She stated, We don' t want to put all of our eggs
in this basket going up. I think, reasonably, we should spread that development around and those
opportunities around for people to invest in. I think what we do in this area will necessarily affect
the West Bank and some of the momentum going on there, in terms of residential. 
feasibility, and getting the
Councilmember Broden stated that issues regarding sustainabili , 
mix of the apartments right should not be resolved with somebo i ly' s gut feeling that they are
hitting the right notes.  She stated, We should have more inform tion. 

ed by the proposed

Councilmember Broden concluded, I just hope that we are not going to alter these plans on a
very short timeframe. The public has only been looking at this f r eleven ( 11)  days. 
Councilmember Broden stated that previous text amendments took several months to process. 
She stated that there can be more time to consider this text amendment without endangering any
other goals.  She stated that she wanted to make sure,  if this amendment goes forward, that design
standards and references back to the redevelopment plans be in( luded in the amendment. She
recommended that the amendment be tabled. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated that plans are a produc L of the moment, and that
dynamics can bring change within weeks, months,  years that do not render them inadequate or
totally out -of -use —but these changes sometimes need to be vie ed as opportunities instead of an
obstructive process.  Councilmember Dr. Varner stated, I think if represents an opportunity and
viability that the City has not seen in my lifetime. I remember when Studebaker closed;  I
remember the Downtown Mall; I remember the problems we had out at Blackthorn with regards
to the golf course. We have been fighting an uphill battle for the last thirty (30)  or forty (40) 
years.  I believe, with the opportunity to do something like this, that we have reached a threshold
that South Bend heretofore has not seen in the last fifty (50)  years —and that' s an opportunity for
a significant downtown project. Councilmember Dr. Varner stated that he is not worried about
the height because the East Bank sits forty (40)  or so feet belov the West Bank, so a building
that looks to be one - hundred and fifty (15 0)  feet on the east side looks to be one- hundred and ten
I 10)  feet in height from the west. He stated that he did not feel' that a building one - hundred and
fifty (150)  feet tall would be so out -of -place in the East Bank. He also stated that a hundred and
fifty (150)  foot height limit does not preclude a developer from'',building something at the heights
more typical of the area, but " it gives people the opportunity to !,dream."  Councilmember Dr. 
Varner stated,  I think progress is as important as process.  I think I said before that the biggest
problem South Bend has is deciding where to put the next huncilred and fifty (150)  foot building. 
We will have made a lot of progress compared to where we we e a few years ago. 

10

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27.  2017

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic thanked everyone present for their patience and their comments. 
Councilmember Ferlic stated that he is completely in support of the plan, pointing out that the
plan lays out more than the height of a project. He stated, It calls for mixed use,  it calls for
restaurants,  it calls for retail, it calls for grocery, it calls for pharmacy, it calls for increased
density. That' s what the plan is all about.  So,  for me, this is an easy decision to support the plan, 
support the vision of the East Bank neighborhood, and look forward to having some great
amenities and some great development in that area. 

Councilmember John Voorde stated, The more you find out, the more you think about the
importance of what we are doing and the importance of getting it right. Councilmember Voorde
stated that there has been a longstanding desire for a pharmacy and grocery store on the east side
of the river. He contended that saying no to one - hundred and fifty (15 0)  feet on the Island is not
going to cripple that vision. He asked, Do we believe that the east side of the river should be
unique and mixed -use?  Regional Cities did. They are willing to commit $4, 900, 000 to a guy who
says he wants to do mixed -use development. Councilmember Voorde went on to explain that the
City was willing to put $5, 000, 000 toward the Commerce Center project and a tax abatement for
ten ( 10)  years instead. This, he explained, meant that if the project takes two ( 2)  years to be built, 
the City would be waiting at least twelve ( 12)  years to see any tax money back. He stated,  I
know that' s not really on the table right now, but it ought to be, because the most important job
we have as City Councilmen is to be responsible, fiscal stewards of the financial resources
available to us.  To put this package together and give it to a developerjust because we want to
keep momentum going and just because he is going to bring a supermarket and pharmacy here
and a six - hundred ( 600)  space garage —it' s not the best way to go.  Councilmember Voorde
stated that experts in city planning have weighed in and discouraged taking this route; that Mr. 
Lykoudis stated that this violates so many tenets of city planning; that there are violations to the
process itself of changing the vision. He stated, I think it is an irresponsible fiscal package to
begin with. If you would just compare it to what I read in the paper on Sunday that' s happening
in Mishawaka— they' re doing a tax incremental finance contribution, but they are doing it in the
form of the tax incremental finance bond, and the money from that bond will replenish the tax
incremental finance fund which we ought to cherish for all kinds of things we never even
dreamed we could use tax incremental financing for before. Councilmember Voorde emphasized
that TIF is not a bottomless pit of money, especially if $5, 000,000 are given away without a
return for over a twelve ( 12)  years.  He stated that he would like to make a motion to continue the
bill until the next Council meeting, to have yet unheard developers and other experts speak on
the matter of this text amendment to the Council and public. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis stated, We should not be stuck in the past. We can move forward. 
Councilmember Davis stated that he sees no reason to have another meeting to discuss this bill. 
He also pointed out that though it might have taken Councilmember Broden four (4)  months to
draft the past text amendment, public discussion had not been held for four (4)  months.  He stated
that this issue has been discussed from September of 2016 until this evening,  adding, To say that
we have only discussed this for eleven ( 11)  days is to use alternative facts.  It is time for us to
move forward. We asked people to come to make compromises. We had meetings to make
compromises. We did that. Councilmember Davis continued by stating, To want to be a
developer in South Bend right now, we are really sending the message that it' s going to be some
tough stuff. Go to Mishawaka, go to the County —they will work with you. Come to South
Bend —we give you the tenth degree. You may not want to come here. That' s not good for South
Bend. That may have been good when you all did it in the past, but that is not the way we need to
move forward in today' s world. 

Councilmember Karen White stated, No one will debate the support for economic
development —but there' s always a " but."  No one will debate the need to have a grocery store or
pharmacy —but there' s a " but."  When we talk about the vision, there' s a " but."  When we talk
about plans,  there' s a " but."  Councilmember White stated that the Council needs to regard this
issue holistically. She asked her fellow Councilmembers that wish for another meeting, What
would change? Would the outcome be different? I don' t think anyone is saying throw the vision
away, throw the plans away. What we are saying is that, as we begin to move forward, we have
to be flexible and we have to be mindful in terms of our decisions. 

11

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 201

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion tF continue Bill No.  08 -17 until March 13th,  2017. 
Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston seconded the motion which was defeated by a roll call
vote of three ( 3)  ayes and five ( 5)  nays ( Councilmembers Rand Kelly, Dr. David Varner, Gavin
Ferlic, Oliver Davis, and Karen White). 

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to accept Substitute Bill No.  08 -17 and send it to
the full Council with a favorable recommendation.  Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded
3)  nays ( Councilmembers
the motion which carried by a roll call vote of five ( 5)  ayes and
Regina Williams- Preston, Jo M. Broden, and John Voorde). 

REGULAR MEETING RECONVENED

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of
Council Chambers on the fourth floor of the County -City E
President Oliver Davis presided with eight ( 8)  members pri

Bend reconvened in the
g at 9: 50 p.m. Council Vice

BILLS — THIRD READING

02 -17

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE
AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE AND
SEEKING A SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT A 10 ACRE TRACT
LOCATED ALONG EDDY STREET AND THE
WEST SIDE OF GEORGIANA STREET
BETWEEN NAPOLEON AND HOWARD, 
COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 4 IN THE
CITY OF SOUTH 'BEND ' INDIANA

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to pass Bill No. 02 -17 subject to and conditioned
upon the written commitments that a portion of the real estate abutting Georgiana Street should
be developed for residential two (2)  story and urban spaces.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic
seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

08 -17

PUBLIC HEARD
INITIATED BY 7
THE CITY OF S( 
AMENDING CH, 
SECTION 21 -03 1
MUNICIPAL CO. 
PART 21- 03. 06( b
MAXIMUM BUI: 
IN CBD DISTRI( 
ST. JOSEPH RIVgR AND THE EAST RACE
WATERWAY

J ON AN ORDINANCE
3E COMMON COUNCIL OF
JTH BEND, INDIANA, 
PTER 21,  ARTICLE 3, 
F THE SOUTH BEND
iE BY ADDING A NEW SUB - 
4)( C)  TO INCREASE THE
DING HEIGHT PERMITTED
CS LOCATED BETWEEN THE

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to pass Bill No. ft 17.  Councilmember Dr. David
Varner seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of five (5)  ayes and three (3)  nays
Councilmembers Regina Williams- Preston, Jo M. Broden, Joh# Voorde). 

RESOLUTIONS

17 -07

12

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, 
APPROVING SPECIAL RATE AGREEMENT
WITH I/ N TEK, L AND I/ N KOTE LP
PURSUANT TO ITY CODE SECTION 17 -29

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

Councilmember Dr. David Varner, Chair of the Utilities Committee, reported that they met this
afternoon and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Richard Nussbaum, 225 South Sunnyside Avenue,  South Bend, IN, served as the presenter of
this bill on behalf of the petitioner. Mr. Nussbaum stated that with him were two (2)  individuals
with statistics to present to the Council to demonstrate how successful UN Tek and UN Kote has
been over the past thirty (3 0)  years. 

John Kegley, President of the United Steelworkers Union,  10446 North 650 East, New Carlisle, 
IN, stated that he has watched the UN Tek and IIN Kote project from ground zero ( 0)  to where it
is today. Mr. Kegley stated that UN Tek and UN Kote has weathered the storms of the steel
industry over the years, adding that it was the only plant that he is aware of that did not
experience massive layoffs and shutdowns in 2009' s industry lull. He stated that the steel
industry has, since 2009, been trying to dig itself out of a hole. Mr. Kegley explained that they
were successful in getting a lot of the competition and outside influences to reel back some of
their imports for five (5)  years, putting I N Tek and I N Kote in a position where they can dig
themselves out of the hole and put them back on an even playing field. He explained that the
good jobs and good benefits offered by UN Tek and IN Kote needed to be preserved, and to do
so they needed the Council' s help. 

Mr. Nussbaum stated, In addition to the employees benefiting from UN Tek and IN Kote, there
are a number of South Bend businesses —two- hundred (200),  in fact —that are vendors out there. 
One of the largest is here to say a few words this evening. 

Tony Maloney, Vice President of Koontz - Wagner Construction Services,  3801 Voorde Drive, 
South Bend, IN, recounted a brief history of Koontz - Wagner. Mr. Maloney stated,  We pride
ourselves on the long -term relationships that we have forged over the years,  and one ( 1)  of these
relationships is one ( 1)  with IN Tek and I/N Kote. We were one ( 1)  of the major subcontractors
for both facilities when they were built during the 1988 to 1990 time period. Since those early
days of construction, Koontz - Wagner has performed ongoing maintenance and capital
improvements to the UN Tek and UN Kote facilities, which have amounted to more than
25, 000, 000 in electrical business.  We currently perform about $ 1, 000, 000 to $ 1, 500, 000 worth
of preventive maintenance and capital improvement services annually, which employs as few as
six ( 6)  but as many as twenty -five (25)  people, depending on the maintenance period when the
work is being performed. The agreement reached between the Board of Public Works and IN
Tek and UN Kote will help the company control their utility cost and keep them competitive in
the markets that they serve. As with every linked economy, the success of one company helps the
success of multiple companies. We are one of those downstream companies whose success is
dependent on the health of the top of the pyramid. Therefore, I urge the Council to approve the
agreement, as presented to you, between the South Bend Board of Public Works and I N Tek and
UN Kote. 

Mr. Nussbaum stated, And now to get to the guts of the reason why we believe that this
agreement is within the ordinance and that it should be approved. 

Patrick McMahon,  1805 Bater Avenue,  South Bend, IN, stated that he was once a part of Project
Future, started in 1982. Mr. McMahon stated, During the first number of years,  we had an easy
job of bringing businesses into the community, primarily because an awful lot of our activity was
centered around the industrial parks. There were businesses that were looking to expand at that
particular point in time in the Midwest. Local businesses who were looking at expanding needed
to move away from confined spots and were looking at whether they should stay here or not. Mr. 
McMahon explained that when Inland Steel was looking for a place in the area to establish a
plant, Project Future pitched to them the land where UN Tek and I N Kote now resides. They had
UN Tek built, but before they could finish that they proposed building UN Kote as well. Mr. 
McMahon stated,  But we had one big problem: as well as it was all planned, the sewer line that
the City ran out there had a limited capacity. We knew it could handle UN Tek, and it could
handle some other development in the park, but to double the size of I N Tek was a whole other
deal.  So,  we were stymied. 

As Mr. McMahon explained it, the Area Plan Commission, after having a study done of the
neighborhood, recommended building a trunk line that would run from the treatment plant on

13

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

Riverside Drive to the site. He stated, Not only could you serve t at site, but you could also serve
that entire Blackthorn area, and the rest of the industrial park are '  that was on the west side of
town, that was in a capacity problem. Because the area was growing faster than what was
previously expected, the sewers going down Cleveland Road were not going to handle the full
development in Blackthorn. If you took a look out Western Avenue and then everything to La
Porte County and to the north side of St. Joseph County, the sew r was designed in order to
handle all of that flow. Who paid for it? It all came out of a secod TIF issue that went forward
because of I/N Kote. Inland Steel addressed the cost of this entire infrastructure improvement
that brought probably the first trunk sewer out in South Bend' s history in maybe forty (40)  or
fifty (50)  years —all to an area that otherwise would not be served for future development. Mr. 
McMahon explained that no taxpayer money had to pay for the extension of the trunk line sewer. 
He stated that none of the effluent that comes from I/N Tek and I/N Kote is storm- related, and
therefore does not contribute to the storm water problem in South Bend. Additionally, their waste
is very diluted in that it does not carry the biological loading that most of the waste from the City
does. It has a very low operating burden on the water plant relative to what the flow would be if
this were serving a large number of residents. He stated, I can certainly understand why the City
from time to time would like to adopt policies where there is a surcharge for projects that choose
to go out in the County rather than be in the City, but I don' t think there is a place for this when
the site or the operation could not be in the City even if we all wanted it to. 

Mr. Nussbaum stated, I spoke to you this afternoon about the technical reasons for why this
agreement makes sense and also meets the requirements of the ordinance. I did not want to
repeat myself on that, this evening. I thought it would be important for you to understand how
important it was for us to work together in order to have this resolution approved. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the lbove bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 
There were none from the public wishing to speak in favor of or n opposition to the this bill. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner addressed Mr. Nussbaum, stating, You mentioned that storm
water is not an issue with regard to the plant sending storm wateto the city —it' s simply effluent
from the plant. But, going forward, if this is potentially such a fi, ancial burden at this point in
time, I would ask for you to look really deeply into the future, because we have some
extraordinary rate increases coming as a result of the consent de ree, and I don' t want anybody
to be terribly surprised about this. I think up front that everybody should understand that. 
Mr. Nussbaum responded, We certainly understand that that is a problem and I think the
company is more than willing to try to assist the City in any way they can. I think right now it' s
important to note that a large part of the rate they pay goes tow ds solving that problem for the
City. Even though we are not costing you, we are happy to do th it. As you deal with the various
agencies— whether it' s the EPA or IDIM or whatever —I/N Tek and I/N Kote will be willing to
help in whatever way they can. 

ISM' 

I' 

1

I '

Councilmember Dr. Varner asked, You' re specifically referencing the pilot payment? 

Mr. Nussbaum responded, No, I' m representing the fact that if you go and look at the
components of how the rate is figured out, a large proportion
capital projects that are dealing with the storm water /sewer issue. 

ven more than the pilot —is for

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill No.  17- 07.  Councilmember Jo M. 
Broden seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote o eight (8)  ayes. 

17 -08

14

A RESOLUTION F THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND
DESIGNATING CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE
CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 
COMMONLY KNOWN AS NORTHEAST
CORNER OF AD MS ROAD AND U.S.  31, 
SOUTH BEND, DI 46628 AN ECONOMIC
REVITALIZATION AREA FOR PURPOSES OF

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 2017

A (6)  SIX YEAR REAL PROPERTY TAX
ABATEMENT FOR GLC PORTAGE PRAIRIE
III, LLC

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chair of the Community Investment Committee, reported that they
met this afternoon and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Aaron Kobb, Department of Community Investment, with offices on the 14th Floor of the
County -City Building, South Bend, IN, served as the presenter of this bill. Mr. Kobb stated, As
our report indicates, the DCI staff worked with a petitioner to come up with an abatement
structure that best meets the needs of the City and the developer. The petitioner is investing
approximately $ 13, 500,000 toward the construction of a new 315, 000 square foot facility in the
AmeriPlex District. After the six ( 6)  year abatement is complete, the annual tax generation from
this project will be roughly just over $300, 000 a year. To address a question that the Council had
asked of us:  the City' s investment in this project would equate to about thirteen percent ( 13 %)  of
the overall project cost. 

Jeff Smoke,  Great Lakes Capital,  112 West Jefferson Street,  South Bend, IN, served as the
petitioner of this bill. Mr. Smoke stated that he had emailed the Council regarding whether or not
there was an Affirmative Action plan in place. He explained the makeup of the workforce is
about forty -four percent ( 44 %) minorities in the local workforce of full -time employees,  and that
there would be about one - hundred and thirty -nine ( 13 9)  additional people hired. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked,  What do you have with you, sir? 

Mr. Smoke responded, These are the Affirmative Action and hiring policies of the tenant, CTDI. 

Councilmember Davis asked to look over those documents,  which Clerk Kareemah Fowler
retrieved from Mr. Smoke to hand to the Council. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston asked if by " minorities"  Mr. Smoke was referring to
racial minorities or gender minorities, in response to which Mr. Smoke clarified that he was
referring to racial minorities. 

Councilmember Karen White stated,  That is a good percentage —that forty- four percent ( 44 %) 
also appreciate you getting that information to us as quickly as you have been able to do. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

There were none from the public wishing to speak in favor of or opposition to this bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill No.  17 -08.  Councilmember Regina
Williams- Preston seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

17 -09

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND
DESIGNATING CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE
CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 
COMMONLY KNOWN AS 321 SOUTH MAIN
STREET,  SOUTH BEND,  IN 46601 AN
ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA FOR
PURPOSES OF A (5)  FIVE YEAR REAL
PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT FOR HIBBERD
DEVELOPMENT, LLC

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chair of the Community Investment Committee, reported that they
met this afternoon and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Aaron Kobb, Department of Community Investment, with offices on the 14th Floor of the
County -City Building, South Bend, IN, served as the presenter of this bill. Mr. Kobb stated, The
petitioner is looking to invest just over $5, 000,000 toward the rehabilitation of an abandoned
building downtown, adjacent to Four Winds Field. It will consist of a mix of office, retail, and

15

PV

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

residential uses along with a street -level public space.  Before you is a request for a five (5)  year
abatement, after which the annual tax generation would be roughly $94,000 annually. The City
investment for this project would be roughly nine percent (9 %).  I
Mark Neal, Gilbert Development,  1329 East Washington Street,  outh Bend, IN, served as the
petitioner of this bill. Mr. Neal stated that the building was built n 1926 as an industrial
manufacturing building. He recounted a brief history of the building, explaining that eventually
the original business consolidated and no longer needed the building, so the petitioner purchased
it in 2016 with the intent of revitalizing and repurposing the building. He stated that it is about
33, 000 square feet. Mr. Neal presented to the Council and public various images of the property. 
Referring to the Gates automobile lot adjacent to the property in question, Mr. Neal stated, They
have a lease that runs to end of this year, 2017.  They have an option for one ( 1)  more two (2) 
year renewal that can take them to June of 2019.  We have worke i with the Redevelopment
Commission to acquire that land in the hopes that we can work something out, so that we can in
fact complete this first phase —with some landscaping that we think you will find attractive —as
well as a later Phase Two ( 2)  over the next four (4)  or five ( 5)  years.  Mr. Neal presented to the
Council and public renderings of the building. He stated,  We believe this will be a crossroads. 
We think it is an important part of fixing some of these broken, 
So, we come before you with a building that we think is going t be a pride of downtown. We
are seeking both retail and office tenants. For retail, we are look g at restaurants and also
looking at some service businesses —we' re thinking hair salon, barber shop,  maybe some other
kind of retail. The spaces are not that large, but we think that it will be important to the
community, as we look to serve our community as we continue to grow and expand our
downtown. This abatement is critical to the finances of the proje t. 

issing teeth in our downtown. 

Councilmember John Voorde asked if Mr. Neal knew the name Df the bank adjacent to the
building in question. 

Mr. Neal responded, I don' t, but I know it was built in 1923. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the :,Lbove bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

There were none from the public wishing to speak in favor of or opposition to this bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill No.  17 -09.  Councilmember Jo M. 
Broden seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

BILLS FIRST READING

11 -17

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH
BEND, INDIANA AMENDING THE LEGAL
DESCRIPTION A D MAP WITHIN
ORDINANCE N 10165 -12 AS PREVIOUSLY
AMENDEDTO E PAND THE BOUNDARIES
OF THE EXIST G RIVERFRONT
DEVELOPMENT IPROJECT AREA UNDER IND. 
CODE 7. 1-  3 - 20 -1

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to send Bill No.  1 I - 17 to the Community
Investment Committee for the meeting on March 13th,  2017.  Cc ancilmember John Voorde
seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  yes. 

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

16

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27. 2017

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to take a ten ( 10)  minute recess. 
Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 

ayes. 

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend reconvened in the
Council Chambers on the fourth floor of the County -City building at 10: 47 p. m. Council Vice
President Oliver Davis presided with eight ( 8)  members present. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to suspend the rules of the Common Council
Meeting to allow those citizens wishing to have Privilege of the Floor to do so before the allotted
time.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight
8)  ayes. 

The words shared by citizens who had the Privilege ofthe Floor may be found under the section
header, " Privilege ofthe Floor.') 

APPEAL OF A CERTIFICATE OF
APPROPRIATENESS FOR 1240 W. THOMAS
STREET -BOYD VS. HISTORIC
PRESERVATION COMMISSION

Interim Council Attorney Aladean DeRose explained the rules for the proceedings.  The
petitioner will have a maximum of twenty (20)  minutes to present his or her case,  which should
also address the specific issue under review, the petitioner' s statement of his or her position, 
relevant witnesses,  if any, and requested action which the petitioner is seeking. The Historic
Preservation Commission will then go next with the maximum of twenty (20)  minutes including
its statement of position, its relevant witness statements, if any,  and its requested action, which
the Historic Preservation Commission seeks.  The petitioner then will have five (5)  minutes, 
maximum, for rebuttal. After that, the Council may ask questions of all the parties up to a
maximum of fifteen ( 15)  minutes for that public portion of the hearing. The action of the HPC
shall be reviewed by members of the Council, as a quasi-judicial body, to determine whether the
HPC' s action in denying a Certificate of Appropriateness was arbitrary and capricious and
abusive discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with applicable law; whether it is contrary to
constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity; whether it is an excess of statutory
jurisdiction, authority, limitation, or statutory rights,  or without observational procedures
required by applicable law and ordinance, or if it is unsupported by substantial evidence. Each
member of Council shall have the opportunity to comment before a motion on this position of
this appeal is accepted by the Chair. The certification of documents received from the Historic
Preservation Commission consisting of. minutes from the public meeting, dated September 19th
2016;  the Letter of Denial of Mr. Boyd' s application, dated September 27th 2016;  Mr. Boyd' s
application for Certificate of Appropriateness;  the staff report concerning the Certificate of
Appropriateness;  and a correspondence from the Building Commissioner. All those materials are
in evidence and for the review of the Council. Also, as part of the process:  the submission by the
petitioner in support of review, as well as the attorney for the HPC' s submission, and all
attachments as evidence to that submission. Those pieces of evidence are before the Council. 

Eric Boyd stated, According to Ordinance 9495 -04 HPC Guidelines, a building application is
deemed an application for a COA. The ordinance requires the Building Department to forward
the application to the Historic Preservation Commission within five (5)  business days,  not three - 
hundred and sixty (360)  days.  I applied for a building permit through the Business Office of the
Building Department. According to the ordinance it is their responsibility to get my application
and get it to the Historic Preservation Commission. They did not do that for almost a year. I am
not held liable for that, because,  according to the ordinance, that is the responsibility of the
Building Commissioner. I filed this application on October, 2015.  The St. Joseph County
Building Commissioner failed to forward my application until August, 2016.  I have a sworn
affidavit from the Building Commissioner that states he has made that mistake.  Someone in his
office did not do the proper procedures of the ordinance.  He acknowledges the department in not
forwarding the application for a pitched roof. If the City accidentally authorized and permitted a
gabled roof rather than a flat roof, the HPC failed to prepare and issue an individual Historic
Preservation Plan, as required by the same ordinance.  The question is:  why do I have to pay for

17

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

it? The ordinance that I am referencing, 9495 -04,  requires the l
to issue an Historic Preservation Plan for a historic property an
I don' t have one,  nor have I been given one in the six ( 6)  years
had that in my possession, or the Building Commissioner, we c
kind of roof, they want this kind of gable, they want this kind c
window, they want this kind of siding." 

storic Preservation Commission
landmark in St. Joseph County. 
have owned the property. Had I
aid say, " Okay, they want this
pitch, they want this kind of

of things that they want, as far
Mr. Boyd stated, Now, they keep referencing a general proced
as materials, however that is not what the ordinance calls for. AJ far as their denial, the reasons
for denial:  losing architectural integrity; changing from a flat ro f to a pitched roof would cause
historical rating to drop. However, HPC approved the change from a flat roof to a pitched metal
roof on November 10,  2011.  According to HPC guidelines, HPC must evaluate the damage or
detriment to public welfare if they approve construction that is permitted, even though it is not
deemed appropriate,  and evaluate the potential hardship that a denial would cause. The residents
of Thomas Street are realistic in nature and were more concerned about losing the actual
structure than losing architectural integrity. The building has been vacant and abandoned for
almost seven ( 7)  years with no roof. We' ve got prostitution, crack addicts in the basement with
needles— that' s what we' re dealing with in my neighborhood. Removing the building— that' s not
what we want. We don' t want anymore vacant lots where people are dumping trash, and things
of that nature. As far as the architectural integrity, HPC has failed to evaluate equity capital
investment of between $ 10, 000415, 000,  and the financial hardship that removing the current
pitched roof or replacing it with a flat one would incur. Now, the second reason for denying my
application was structural soundness.  St. Joseph Building Commissioner and City Engineer met
with me on -site,  September 19th,  2016, to perform a progress ch ck. The Building Commissioner
states, " The structural engineer is needed to evaluate and also needs to file a Homeland Security
permit, whose jurisdiction supersedes the local Building Department."  Based on the
recommendation of the Building Commissioner, I employed a 1'  ensed structural engineer who is
licensed in Texas,  Florida, Indiana, and Colorado.  He has done
property and says that the roof is perfectly fine at ninety -five percent ( 95 %),  because it is not
complete. So,  if the roof is structurally fine, according to a licensed structural engineer in the
State of Indiana, I can' t agree with the Historic Preservation Commission because,  one ( 1), 
are not structural engineers,  and two ( 2),  obviously they are not !,going to weigh on my side. 
Regarding the structural engineer, he has a Master' s degree from Notre Dame, he evaluated the
project, he evaluated the roof, and this before the seal by the St 'te of Indiana. 

o ( 2)  inspections of my

they

embrane —not for the

Mr. Boyd stated,  The other thing that they denied my applicatioi i based upon is a lack of other
options of flat roof quotes.  When I met with them, I gave them irie flat roof quote, which I have
with me here.  This flat roof quote is dated from 2012,  from Sou h Bend Roofing, Siding and
Roofing Company. It' s for $23, 600. This is just for the rubber
application, not for the decking, not for the installation, none of hat. This is from 2013,  which
means that I researched the flat roof before I went with the roof that the City permitted me to do. 
So that' s why the flat roof was taken off the table. They want more quotes for flat roofs, and
that' s the only thing that they are saying that they will approve, however, once again, they
approved the gabled roof in 2011.  I have that document with me,  as well. Now: lack of other
options.  The flat roof was never proposed or suggested by HPC. HPC previously approved a
metal pitched roof on November 10th,  2011 and issued the owner a seal weight for the
replacement roof. The HPC guidelines ordinance,  which I have referenced before,  requires HPC
to develop a Historic Preservation Plan for landmarks and assist in the implementation of such
plans. The owner has no knowledge, nor was given a specific Pi eservation Plan for 1240 West
Thomas Street.  Such failures and reversal of previously approved COA' s has contributed to the
hardships placed on the owner at 1240 West Thomas Street. 

Mr. Boyd stated, Now, the Historic Preservation Commission was given a flat roof quote, which
I have shown you. It' s only for the rubber —it' s not for the decking or the installation of the
actual joists. The Firehouse burned in 2007,  so when you look up, basically, there' s no roof. All
of that has to be repaired. Now, again, the quote was for $23, 000. HPC' s solution for this
problem of a gabled roof, which the City has permitted and allowed, is that we remove this roof
and we put in a flat roof and that I, myself, incur the cost, or that Community Investment foots
the bill. Regarding resources in the City, I have what' s called a I' File of Denial."  My File of

18

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 2017

Denial is any opportunity or resource in the City that I have reached out to and basically have
been turned down by. Regarding the Vacant to Value grant program, I spoke to Elizabeth in
Community Investment. She says my property is not vacant or abandoned enough.  Once again, 
we' ve got prostitution, drug addiction, and vandalism going on. I' ve got copies of Police reports
where people have literally driven their car, backed into my garage door, picked it up, put it on
their truck, and I found it at the scrapyard. I think this is vacant and abandoned, ladies and
gentlemen. I' ve got letters to Scott Ford, who I have learned no longer works with Community
Investment. Still waiting for a reply. I' ve got a letter to the ReStore of St. Joseph County asking
for donations or possibly discounts —this is from 2014. No reply. I have the Southeast Berrien
County Landfill Authority, dated February 20th, 2014, asking for discounts or some type of help
with dumpsters to clear some of the debris.  Still waiting on a reply from 2014. 

Mr. Boyd stated, What I am trying to tell you is:  you want development in the City of South
Bend; you want change to the City of South Bend; I especially want it in my neighborhood, and
I' m trying to do that. My wife and I have moved over 30, 000 pounds of debris out of that
building by hand, and I' ve got the receipts to prove it. What I am asking for today is pretty
simple:  I' m asking for a Preservation Plan for my property so that you can tell me exactly what
you want me to do so I can do it right the first time. The other thing I' m asking for is that you
accept the roof the way it is. You gave a permit for the roof. The structural engineer says the roof
is fine. If the City made a mistake and you want the roof changed, I' m asking you to foot the bill. 
Community Investment —I' ve met with them twice within the past couple of months,  based on
the suggestion of the Historic Preservation Commission —they are finally reaching back to me, 
after I sent them the emails from 2015 asking for a response.  If they want to foot the bill, I' m
perfectly fine and happy with you guys changing the roof as long as you are paying for it. I can' t
get on that roof again. I just can' t, I' m sorry. I' ve done it once, I can' t do it again. So,  those are
the two ( 2)  things I' m requesting. A Preservation Plan for my property, which I' ve been denied. 
According to the South Bend ordinance,  I' m required to have one ( 1).  The Historic Preservation
Commission was supposed to prepare one —it' s been seven ( 7)  years.  There isn' t one ( 1).  The
other thing is, simply put: if the roof is going to change,  I would prefer that Community
Investment pays for that and that, if that is not going to happen, I would prefer that we keep the
roof the way it is.  It is structurally sound, it is correct, it is built to standards.  I' m a licensed
building contractor —I' ve done this before. Based on the information that you have in front of
you, it gives a little transparency regarding what' s happening across the street. Thank you for
your time. 

Brett Hummer, Deputy County Attorney of St. Joseph County, representing the Historic
Preservation Commission, approached the podium. Councilmember Dr. David Varner disclosed
that he has had a relationship with Mr. Hummer and his family for numerous years. 

Mr. Hummer stated, My name is Brett Hummer. I am an attorney in town, and I am also
privileged to serve as a Deputy County Attorney for St. Joseph County, and,  in that capacity, I
get to help the Historic Preservation Commission, both —since it is a creature of a City ordinance
and a County ordinance. Thank you for your time, tonight. I suppose I will kind of work
backwards,  in regards to a couple of the things that Mr. Boyd pointed out, and then I will get
back to why I think this is really a fairly straightforward decision. First of all, Mr. Boyd has
referenced that the City had approved this gabled roof idea. That is incorrect. What should be
made known tonight, as well, is that regardless of what you, as a Council, do in terms of saying
whether HPC' s decision was proper or not, this property is entangled with other issues at the
Building Department. This is not going to end the issue, regardless of what you say HPC does. 
There is a letter in the materials that you have from Building Commissioner Bulot, August 10th, 
2016, and this does speak to this roof. This certainly does not support the idea that the City has
previously approved this idea of a gabled roof on this historic landmark. This was to the Historic
Preservation Commission from Mr. Bulot, August 10th,  2016: " Dear Elicia, on October 15th, 
2015,  this Office issued a Building permit for commercial roofing at the above referenced
address."  But this is the important part: " What was to be a structural repair and reroofing job has
now morphed into a partial roof on the main building and a new second story addition on the rear
of the building. None of this has been properly permitted."  That is very important to understand. 
In addition to that, the prior approval Mr. Boyd speaks of was not in regards to approving a
newfangled gabled roof on this historic landmark. Mr. Boyd was granted, back in 2011,  an RME. 

19

REGULAR MEETING

i

j

FEBRUARY 27, 201

ans as an in -kind

HPC uses that term for " Routine Maintenance Exclusion."  That r
replacement— it' s in use when a repair is actually needed, such a the fire that Mr. Boyd made
reference to. The roof had collapsed, so he did not have to go thr ugh the Certificate of
Appropriateness application process —he could just go to staff, like he did in 2011,  and say, " I
don' t have a roof. I need to replace this and repair it, in- kind."  And that was approved in 2011. 
Nothing in that RME —and that' s in "Exhibit B"— nowhere in that does it reference a gabled
roof, this asymmetrical gabled pitched roof that Mr. Boyd has now put on his building without
prior approval. It states nowhere in there that that gabled roof is approved. It simply says, 
Replace metal roofing." That is important to keep in mind, as well. In regards to what Mr. Boyd
referenced, as far as what the Building Department did: back in 2015 when he applied for a
Building permit, it is true that that was never received and never orwarded on to HPC. The legal
effect of that is that HPC did not and could not have considered I iat an application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness. If the Building Department receil es an application for a building
permit, it is required by its ordinance to forward that on to HPC. I agree with Mr. Boyd: that' s
not his fault that that did not happen and that didn' t come from the Building Department. That is
also not HPC' s fault for not receiving something that should have been forwarded to it, as well. 
What happened there was, back in August, 2015 when he applie for the permit from the
Building Department that was never forwarded on to HPC, it was never taken in then at that time
as a Certificate of Appropriateness application. If it had been, w would be in here probably last
February instead of where we are today. In light of that, HPC did not take any action with that. 
When it did receive the application, most recently in August, 20 6, when that permit was finally
forwarded and they learned of that, they properly and promptly ocketed that on their September, 
2016 agenda, as they do and they did for every other application for a COA. 
Mr. Hummer stated,  So,  fortunately, it' s very late in the eveningl'and you do not have to sit here, 
as Ms. DeRose indicated, as members of a jury. You don' t have to reweigh evidence,  so to
speak. The standard of review here is very high, and I think it' s high for a reason. The HPC is
granted authority through the ordinances that this Council has put into effect to consider and
either grant or deny an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for its properties in
historic districts or properties which are historic landmarks. This property in particular is a
historic landmark, also created by this Council back in 1999, through Ordinance No. 9037 -99 on
September 27th,  1999.  This Council granted historic landmark status to this property, and that
should mean something. If we are to allow major construction projects to be designated historic
landmarks in our town without prior approval through HPC, which is required by the ordinance, 
why are we calling these things historic landmarks? I appreciate the situation that Mr. Boyd is in, 
but this process was in effect —and certainly he knew about HPC back in 2011,  because he went
to them at that time. Yet, he went ahead and started this construction project of this gabled
asymmetrical roof without prior approval with HPC. That' s what caused a major issue at the
September meeting when this was finally before the HPC prope0y. 

1. 

Mr. Hummer stated, What you have before you here, the standa d of review that Ms. DeRose
indicated: was HPC arbitrary and capricious? Did they throw thr ordinance out the window? Did
they throw the process or procedure out the window and just de ide on a whim what they were
going to do here? No. They were not arbitrary and capricious. E 'd they violate any of Mr. 
Boyd' s constitutional rights or statutory rights? No. Did they ac without observance to the
procedure and what' s in the HPC ordinance? No, and I will exp ain how they did observe that in
just a minute. It is a high standard, and the Council should respect that, respectfully,  and give
deference to the ordinance as written. Mr. Boyd really did not n cessarily touch on too many of
those issues in his position here, just now, as far as why he mee s within some of those standards
of review before you, but the HPC reviewed his application heral last fall, as it would any other
application. His application was,  as he mentioned, for approval to construct an asymmetrical, 
gabled roof on top ofthis Firehouse, this landmark. In "Exhibit A" to what you have, it shows
the picture of the Firehouse as it was in 1999 when this Council granted it historic landmark
status.  You will note it has a flat roof, a flatline roof, and it does not look anywhere close to what
Mr. Boyd has since put on this roof without approval from the HPC. Unfortunately, he started on
the project before getting that approval, and, as of the time of the September 19th,  2016 meeting
at HPC, as I referenced in Mr. Bulot' s letter from August, he had not obtained the necessary
permits to do what he had already done on that property, as weld.  Despite that, HPC did consider

20

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 2017

Mr. Boyd' s application and it considered the ordinance factors as it is allowed to do, but the
ordinance specifically says that the HPC can consider the following when it' s reviewing a COA, 
the Certificate of Appropriateness,  application: it can consider the appropriateness of the
it can consider the detriment to the public
proposed alteration or construction — that' s one ( 1); 
welfare if the alteration is permitted; and the other one ( 1) 
is that it can consider the hardship a
potential denial will cause to the applicant if it' s denied. And then it can also consider —and this
is something Mr. Boyd alluded to —he is suggesting that the HPC has dropped the ball in terms
of preparing some sort of Preservation Plan with respect to his property. The HPC is not required
to go out proactively and develop Preservation Plans for every single individual historic
landmark or property within its jurisdiction. What that means is,  it is by ordinance allowed and
permitted to —and should— create at least minimum maintenance expectations for districts or for
historic landmarks. It has done that, and they refer to those as " Group B standards."  And, by the
way, Mr. Klusczinski, President of HPC, and Ms. Feasel, Executive Director are here, and they
certainly know a lot more about this than I do. If any questions need to be answered, they can
also come up here afterwards. 

Mr. Hummer stated, There is a Preservation Plan in effect for what this property is:  it' s a historic
landmark. These standards also are included with the materials before — that' s in my Position
Statement as " Exhibit J."  Most importantly, and you can probably hone in on this quote and
probably realize what was done here by HPC was appropriate —it says in the Group B standards, 
which are applicable to historic landmarks like this property: " Additions to landmarks should not
detract from the original form and unity of the landmark."  Really, all we need to look at is the
picture of what this building looked like at the time landmark status was granted to it in 1999, 
and what Mr. Boyd has now done to this roof. It has completely and unfortunately destroyed and
decimated what was a very historical and classic looking firehouse station with a flat roof, as it
was built when it was built. It has violated the Group B standards. HPC,  at the meeting in
September —it was a unanimous nine ( 9)  to zero ( 0)  vote in favor of denying Mr. Boyd' s
application. It did a roll call vote in denying that. A brief reading of those comments, if I may, 
shows exactly how the Commission respected and appreciated what' s in its ordinance,  as far as
the factors that it can consider; it also shows that they were mindful of the Group B standards
applicable to historic landmarks; it also shows that they were inclined to listen to Mr. Boyd' s
financial issues with it —you will hear overtones of that in these roll call letters. The nine ( 9) 
commissioners present there —I' ll just read these for you briefly —this is " Exhibit H"  in your
packet, it' s on page six ( 6).  Commissioner Gordon moved to deny the application. All of these
are votes in favor of denying the application. Commissioner Hertel' s statement, though, with her
vote was: " The best course of action in maintaining the historic integrity of the building."  So, 
obviously, she' s concerned with the architectural integrity and the appropriateness of this and the
public detriment in allowing this because,  frankly, the public detriment here is eviscerating
landmark status to a previously designated historic landmark. Commissioner Parker also voted
the same way.  She said, " Due to the architectural character of the building, and the lack of other
options /quotations."  So,  she' s also considering the financial hardship that this might create to
Mr. Boyd, although he kind of already did this to himself, respectfully, with going about this
without getting the application first. It does show that the commissioners were interested in the
quotation and the financial aspects of this project. 

Mr. Hummer stated, Commissioner Anderson, when he voted, cited the " lack of conforming to
architectural integrity of historic building."  Again, that' s the [ unintelligible]  the appropriateness
of the proposed construction, which is in the ordinance itself. Commissioner Gordon, his
comment was: " Not in keeping with the integrity of landmark status."  Again, hearkening to that
idea that this is a historic landmark and this construction is really deleting that stature as historic
landmark. Commissioner Klusczinski, he stated, " The work is not in keeping with landmark
standards and guidelines."  Like those Group B standards I mentioned. " The work was performed
without prior approval by the HPC and the Building Department. Evidence suggests that the new
changes are not structurally sound and in compliance with the current building code."  And if I
can go on a slight rabbit trail on that one,  Mr. Boyd also referenced that he had some out -of -state
approvals showing that this is structurally sound —those were not before the HPC at the time of
the meeting in September. I want the Council to be aware of that. Jumping back into what
Commissioner Klusczinski said, though— again, this goes to the fact that the Commission did

21

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

consider the financial aspect of this, the potential financial detrinient to Mr. Boyd. It says, " There
is only one quotation obtained by the applicant for in -kind work.  So,  the commissioner was
like he
curious as to what financial impact this might have on Mr. Boyd. He obtained one ( 1), 
said, for twenty- three -and -some thousand dollars ($ 23, 000).  The Fornmission asked him there, 
Well, isn' t there another roofing company that could maybe loo'  at this? It' s a very expensive
project."  So, they were looking at that with him at the time of the meeting. Mr. Klusczinski also
said, " There is insufficient documentation to consider alternative proposals at this time."  That' s
getting at the potential financial hardship in that there was one ( 1)  quotation presented, so HPC
could not really collaborate with Mr. Boyd at that time, even if they wanted to, to work through
some potential resolution. Commissioner Voll also hearkened to the potential hardship about
this,  and he said it' s " a tough decision because of all the work the owner has put into it. The
building, if it were restored in that neighborhood, would be a classic piece. That is a difficult
option here, but there is hope that there may be ways to achieve that."  Commissioner Buccellato: 
Project does not meet standards and guidelines,  in particular additions to Landmarks should not
detract from the original form."  So that' s going directly at those 
mentioned earlier. He also said, " This roof, as proposed, will detract from the original form. 
Would like to see the building saved, and recommended that if a sloped roof is necessary
financially, the owner would come back with a proposal that do
the structure." 

not detract from the form of

roup B standards that I

Mr. Hummer stated,  So,  again, the proper process here would be for Mr. Boyd to come back with
that would be in keeping in -kind
a new application for a Certificate of Appropriateness.  One ( 1), 
with the landmark status, and we would go about it again. But, Mr. Buccellato was keeping in
mind the ordinance factors and the Group B standards when he cast his vote, as well. And then
Commissioner Gelfman —the last one —she cited " architectural integrity, lack of other quotes on
a flat roof, ..." Again, that kind of gets into their consideration 6f the potential financial
hardship. "... changing from a flat roof to gabled roof, losing the structural integrity of the
building as -is historically, and materials being used."  I think, taping it straight from the horse' s
mouth, if you will— listening to the commissioners —their mindset at the time that they cast this
vote was to deny Mr. Boyd' s application. I think it' s clear that, at least from the Council' s
perspective, there was no arbitrary capriciousness here. There was no throwing out the statutes. 
This was not decided on a whim. They went through the procesE like they always do,  and they
consider what they can consider: the ordinance' s parameters and, also, the Group B standards
applicable to historic landmarks.  So,  with that being said, I will
rid. there. As I said, I have Mr. 
Klusczinski and Ms. Feasel here if any questions would like to lie asked.  We would ask that the
Council sustain and affirm the HPC' s decision to deny Mr. Boy ' s application. 

I

Mr. Boyd rebutted, I will respond to some of Mr. Hummer' s comments. First off, regarding the
roof not being properly permitted, I will show you right here, the. City of South Bend, on October
13th,  2015 —this right here is a blueprint that shows the roof at t ie elevation of ten ( 10)  feet. This
was given to the Building Commissioner on that date and he was told of the elevation and what
the roof would consist of, as far as materials.  This is the back side of that document, which was
also given to the Building Commissioner. This is a layout of the building showing which side of
the building was going to be roofed. Regarding his memo stating that the roof was not properly
permitted, this is the permit which he actually issued me,  and these are the receipts which you
are free to check, and I do have a copy of bank statements if yo would like to see those. And
this is the cost of those permits,  and that is his signature.  So,  thi
is what is deemed a proper
permit for that roof. Regarding the meeting on —I think it was S eptember. The hearing was
called based on the Building Commissioner' s,  I guess, convers ion with the Historic
Preservation Commission. He suggested that I talk with them and try to resolve the issue,  in light
of the mistake that he made. What Mr. Hummer will tell you aboout is the document, as far as the
d after I left the room. After I
denial is concerned —what he won' t tell you is what was discus
left the room, Commissioner Gelfman asked the attorney —Mr. Mummer, sitting right here — 
Well, how do we fine people or give violations to people who don' t do what we tell them to
do ?" He said, " Well, you don' t have the authority to do that. Th Common Council hasn' t given
that to you."  His response was, " Well, how do we get that ?" "  ell, you have to go to the
Common Council and ask for that."  So, Mr. Hummer suggested. that they lean on the other parts
of the City, such as Code Enforcement or the Building Commissioner, who can give violations. 

22

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 2017

After this meeting and after they had this discussion after I left the room, what was given to me, 
weeks later, were violations from the Building Department.  Starting tomorrow, February 28tH, 
2017, I' m fined up to $ 1, 000 a day for a roof that the City told me I could put up. He didn' t tell
you about that, did he?  Well, that' s what' s going on. Now, regarding Mr. Hummer' s comments
as far as permits, the roof is the issue that we are focusing on, and the roof, as I' ve shown you, 
was properly permitted. Now, their suggestion of replacing and coming back to them with a
COA for a flat roof —well, once again, if the roof you told me I could do was incorrect, why do I
have to foot the bill? If the flat roof was the first roof that you wanted, that' s what you should
have asked for. Regarding the policies and procedures —which he states they don' t have to do a
Preservation Plan for each landmark —page seven ( 7),  if you turn it from the bottom onto page
eight ( 8),  it says, " they are required to develop Historic Preservation Plans for historic landmarks
and districts together with other public and private agencies to assist in the administration and

implementation of such plans."  That' s each landmark. I haven' t gotten one ( 1). 
7)  years. 

It' s been seven

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic asked Interim Council Attorney Aladean DeRose if the Council
could see the documents referenced by Mr. Boyd, in response to which Ms. DeRose explained
that those were items that the Council would be privy to post - hearing.  She added, The record of
the Council is limited to what was presented to the Commission. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis explained that each Councilmember had two ( 2)  minutes to ask
questions to Mr. Boyd or those representing the Historic Preservation Commission. 

Councilmember Karen White stated, The basics of this hearing was based on the five (5)  points
that had been shared with us,  and so I want to make sure,  as we begin to look at all the exhibits
and the hearing, that our main charge is to focus on whether or not these particular actions by the
HPC were not adhered to. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic asked Mr. Hummer, Would you please explain —I think this was a
part of the record —why the plan he is requesting was not provided, or why this kind of general
plan is just kind of out there and should be observed? Just touch base a little bit more about the

plan. 

Mr. Hummer responded,  Mr. Boyd, actually, he just read it, and I don' t really dispute what he
just read. " historic landmarks " — plural. That does not mean go out and individually develop a
preservation plan for every single landmark. The HPC should develop maintenance standards for
historic landmarks —and that' s the Preservation Plan. How do we preserve these things? Well, 
they implement and adopt minimum maintenance standards so that all owners of historic
landmarks in the City understand,  in advance and upfront, what those maintenance standards are. 
The Group B standards are the Preservation Plans. 

Councilmember Ferlic asked, With respect to the observation of procedures required by
applicable law— regardless of whether or not the HPC was given notice, did the HPC essentially
follow procedures outlined by law, if he is supposed to receive something within five (5)  days
and he didn' t receive it within three- hundred and sixty -five (365)  days? Were procedures
followed? 

Mr. Hummer responded,  Yes,  absolutely, procedures were followed. When HPC did receive the
building permit from August, 2015 but not until August, 2016, then properly, by ordinance, it
immediately put it on its docket for the next meeting in September, 2016. 

Councilmember Ferlic asked, Did they observe the procedures required by applicable law
throughout the entire process? With or without fault of their own, it doesn' t seem that they — 

Mr. Hummer interjected, Yes,  I would say they did. 

Councilmember John Voorde deferred questioning. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked Mr. Hummer, Has the HPC ever made a plan for any
particular owner? 

Mr. Hummer responded,  Like a tailored individual plan? 

23

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 2017

Councilmember Davis asked, Have they ever done it to any

Mr. Hummer responded, That' s probably a question better

by Mr. Klusczinski. 

stated,  The standards
Timothy Klusczsinski, President of the Historic Preservation C
that we refer to as " Group B standards,"  or the " District standards ", or any of the other nine ( 9) 
historic districts within the City of South Bend are derived from the National Park Service. They
are not proactive development standards,  because we don' t develop the properties,  we don' t own
the properties. We do assist owners of historic properties with development ideas and
opportunities and contacts and networking, and that kind of thing. 

Councilmember Davis asked, So,  have you developed something for an individual owner? That' s
my question. 

Mr. Klusczinski responded, The standards that we circulate - 

Councilmember Davis interjected, Not the standards —have you made a plan for somebody? 

Mr. Klusczinski responded, The standards are the plan, because it' s a plan on keeping the

Councilmember Davis interjected, No, no, no.  The plan that Mr 
you ever done that for anybody? 

Boyd is talking about —have

Mr. Klusczinski responded, I don' t think that' s within our- 

Councilmember Davis interjected, A custom plan —have you
Boyd is talking about? 

made a custom plan that Mr. 

Mr. Klusczinski responded, Elicia informs me "that Leeper Park s the only different set of
custom standards, because of the interest in the environmental t pography. 

Councilmember Davis responded, So,  the answer is yes. 

Interim Council Attorney DeRose stated,  The answer is no for buildings, and yes for real estate. 

Councilmember Davis asked, Please,  say that again? 

Ms. DeRose stated,  The answer is no for buildings, and yes for I

dscaping. 

Councilmember Davis asked,  Part of your process does include talking Greg through the
building. Is that a part of your process? 

11

Mr. Klusczinski responded,  Sometimes.  The ordinance restricts he HPC to aesthetics relevant to
the exterior of the building. 

Councilmember Davis asked, Let me say,  in this kind of a situal ion, is part of your process going
through the Building Department? 

Mr. Klusczinski responded,  The Building Department and the Jepartment of Code Enforcement, 

by law, by the ordinance that you passed, are both our enforcement agencies. 

Councilmember Davis interjected, I understand that. 

Mr. Klusczinski continued, They are partnership agencies.  We don' t have to enter the building to
be able to do the work. 

Councilmember Davis asked,  I agree with all that, but is that a part of the process? 

Mr. Klusczinski responded, We start with an inspection of the property. 

Councilmember Davis asked, And then go to the Building Depa

I

rtment? And, it comes to you all? 

Mr. Klusczinski responded, No, no, no. 

Councilmember Davis asked, The one ( 1)  year that he did not get his information —is that not

part of the process? 

Mr. Hummer responded,  Mr. Davis, if I may. An owner of a hi oric landmark, basically, in
order to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness from HPC, can eally take either one ( 1)  of two

24

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

they go to the HPC themselves —and, frankly, that' s how most of them

2)  channels.  One ( 1), 
come in —and they fill out paperwork and say, " I want to apply for a Certificate of
Appropriateness,"  and then HBC obviously knows right then and there that that' s what they want
to do,  and they put them on the agenda for the next meeting. The other route is —if that is what
the ordinance allows —if they go to the Building Department first, it' s supposed to toggle with
the Building Department, " Okay this is a historic district..." 

Councilmember Davis interjected, Excuse me.  So,  that is a part of your process then, because

you have two (2)  routes. Thank you. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated,  The Historic Preservation Commission approved a
repair and maintenance to take care of the damage —the hole in the roof. 

Elicia Feasel,  Executive Director of the Historic Preservation Commission, responded, Yes,  in

2011.  In -kind. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner continued, But that particular approval was strictly for repair, not for
any particular — 

Ms. Feasel interjected,  Staff has no authorization to approve any aesthetic changes or- 

Councilmember Dr. Varner interjected, Okay. At a later date, the Building Department did issue
a permit, which was applied for by Mr. Boyd. 

Ms. Feasel responded, He was actually caught by a building inspector constructing the roof that' s
there now and subsequently sent to the Building Department. The Building Department was in a
bit of a hurry to get a confirmation - 

Councilmember Dr. Varner interjected, But at some point they did issue a permit, and they
would not have issued a permit if they had not believed that it was structurally acceptable. Do
they take structural consideration...? 

Mr. Klusczinski responded, That' s a point of contention in the Building Department. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner stated,  It is understood, at least at this point, that, somehow or
another, the Building Department forgot to make the connection between the HPC and
crosstalk] ... and that leaves us where we are,  as of today, and that there' s been some
construction with the appropriate permit, and now it' s the Certificate of Appropriateness? 

Mr. Hummer responded,  Correct, that' s the Certificate of Appropriateness process. 

Mr. Klusczinski responded,  There were additional construction efforts, from an addition on the
back, that the Building Department still has never approved, that has happened since the HPC' s
denial back in 2016. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner asked,  When Mr. Boyd came back to you,  it was recognized at that
point that construction had taken place without a Certificate of Appropriateness —which is
separate from the building permit that he had? 

Mr. Klusczinski nodded in affirmation. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner asked,  And this brings us to where we are today? 

Mr. Klusczinski responded,  Sure. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden asked,  So,  is there a time factor that kicks in when the applicant
came to the Building Department? Is there an automatic amount of time? 

Mr. Klusczinski responded, The Building Department has five ( 5)  days to be able to provide the
information to the HPC. 

Mr. Hummer responded,  And that' s what didn' t happen here. 

Councilmember Broden stated,  So,  that ball was dropped. 

Mr. Hummer responded,  But not by HPC. 

25

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

Councilmember Broden asked,  I want to make sure,  in terms of
who looked at the structure of the roof —that was not at the earf, 
the earlier hearing? 

record: the licensed engineer
hearing? It wasn' t evidence at

Mr. Klusczinski responded, No. 

Councilmember Broden asked, What about the sworn statement y the Building Commissioner
that he made a mistake? Was that entered into the record or takeo into consideration? 

Mr. Klusczinski responded, Not at that time. 

Mr. Hummer responded, Not at that time, Councilwoman. We actually reached out to him. We
were trying to figure out what happened here with this. So,  we obtained that from him to show
that we did not have an application for a Certificate of Appropri

teness. 

Councilmember Broden asked, And when you purchase —I ass
purchaser of this property at the time of purchasing —you know that it' s a historic property? 

e,  Mr. Boyd was the original

Mr. Boyd responded,  You' re asking me? 

Councilmember Broden responded,  Yes. 

Mr. Boyd responded,  When I purchased it and reached out to the HPC, the historic preservation
specialist came to the property —I invited him to come through the property and possibly do
some type of assessment.  I don' t have any paperwork on that. I did know it was historic, and I
did reach out to them and I spoke with the Director Cathy Hostetler, and I told her that I wanted
to roof the building, that it was exposed to the elements and som thing needed to happen. I
explained to her that it needed a roof and she said, " Well, what kind of a roof are you
considering ?" and I said, " Metal."  If you look on that permit, it says, " Metal."  This building
never had a metal roof. Metal was considered because I figured it would be the cheapest thing to
put on it, so as far as an RME or a COA, ABC, EBD, I don' t un erstand what they' re talking
about. I just know that she gave me a piece of paper that said th
the building. So,  that was my understanding. 

I could start putting the roof on

Councilmember Broden asked,  So,  you were or weren' t aware of the Group B standards? 

Mr. Boyd responded, I wasn' t. I wasn' t given that until last year, I think before the hearing or
something. They said that there' s some kind of guidelines that I' m supposed to follow. 

Councilmember Broden asked, And whose responsibility is that ypically to be aware or to
become aware of those standards? 

Mr. Boyd responded,  I don' t know. When I purchased the prope y, I reached out to them about
fixing the property. No paperwork was given to me.  So... 

Councilmember Broden asked, Yet, you knew you' d purchased a historic house? 

Mr. Boyd responded,  Yes.  That' s right. When I applied for a pe
Department, I was given a permit and told I could roof the build ng with a gabled roof, and I
gave them the blueprints, so I thought everything was correct. 

it from the Building

Councilmember Broden asked,  So,  the RME was specific to a re oof? 

Mr. Boyd responded, A partial reroot or repair, I guess,  is what 1 hey' re saying. 

Councilmember Broden asked, Pivoting off of that,  an additiona I story was added? 

Mr. Boyd responded, The back portion— there' s a one ( 1)  story garage.  There was a flat roof that
was there at one time. We gutted that and also took out the garage door to repair that— it was
dilapidated. Upon trying to recreate a flat roof, it wasn' t successful,  so we decided we would
structurally put in just a one ( 1)  story add -on. Nothing too fancy for the neighborhood to the back
of the property. In the past, HPC has approved thatadd-ons to the rear, because it' s not at the
face of the building. According to HPC- 

Councilmember Broden interjected, They had approved that in
cases?  In other buildings? 

case?  Or just in general

26

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

Mr. Boyd responded, Other properties. Residential. Regarding the staff report that was given to
the hearing, they' re in favor of that addition. That' s why I haven' t really talked about the
addition. I did say that the permits need to be applied for, but there' s not really much objection to
it. 

Ms. Feasel stated, Actually, the Commission approved the addition to the second story, but they
did not approve the siding and the windows to be applied /salvaged that Mr. Boyd obtained as a
donation. And, after the siding and windows were denied, he installed them anyway. 

Mr. Boyd stated,  That is correct. I was subjected to a demo hearing in the middle of January, so
if there' s no progress, they tear your building down. So,  something had to happen. Between
Code, Historic Preservation, Homeland Security — you' ve got to make everybody happy, so... 
And those things can be changed. 

Interim Council Attorney DeRose addressed the Council,  stating, Just a point of order, but you
must consider the materials that were presented at the time of hearing. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston asked, Point of order: when you' re saying " the
materials presented,"  that includes the stuff we got beforehand? 

Ms. DeRose responded,  The information is part of the record. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked, Not just tonight, but all of this? 

Ms. DeRose responded, That information is part of the record.  But anything that is post - appeal is
not relevant to tonight' s deliberation. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly stated,  And to that end,  I want to make sure we' re talking about the
right thing here.  So, regardless of —and I feel for your plight, Mr. Boyd — regardless of how
egregious of a mistake the Building Department may have made, we are trying to determine here
whether or not the HPC acted capriciously with regard to,  simply, their decision on whether or
not this gabled roof was appropriate for the building. Is that correct? 

Mr. Hummer responded,  Yeah, that' s correct. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated,  The process has two ( 2)  ways. Like, if I buy a historic
building, I have two ( 2)  ways that I can go about that. One ( 1) 
is to go directly to the HPC.  If
there needs to be repairs or something I can go to the Building Department. Either one ( 1)  of
those processes is valid. Right? Okay. Some of the information that I saw in the appeal I have
questions about. This goes to the issue of process. My concern is that it sounds like, based on
what I read, there' s a question in here —that the process is somewhat confusing.  So,  back in 2011
there was an attempt to begin the process of repair. Have there been any changes in any staffing
or anything since this whole thing first started?  I' m wondering what' s the difference —it seems
like positions have changed a little bit. 

Mr. Klusczinski responded,  I think the record is consistent. I think —if I get the core of your
question —the changes are the differences between the Routine Maintenance Exclusion,  RME, or
a Certificate of Appropriateness, which has to undergo a public hearing and go through the board
for a decision. HPC is a quasi-judicial body, just like you are right now. So,  at the beginning, Mr. 
Boyd presented to our administrator at the time, Catherine Hostetler, that he needed to clad the
roof to protect it from the elements.  And, given the choice of some materials, Catherine made a
decision with some latitude, choosing a different material to be able to provide the flat roof
instead of what had been on there previously —if it was UPDL, or I don' t know. The effect was
to protect the landmark as a whole. So,  the HPC staff was acting as kind of an emergency
mediator trying to make sure that they can allow some materials to which Mr. Boyd said he had
access to be able to clad the roof, but not change the design or the style, or do anything. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated,  So,  one ( 1)  of the things I read in here was about
weighing the difference between saving a structure —or public detriment —and whether this was
the right or the wrong. 

Mr. Klusczinski responded,  Right. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked, Architecture, right? 

27

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 2017

Mr. Klusczinski responded,  The HPC, by ordinance,  has to consider three ( 3)  elements,  and that
is:  the appropriateness,  which is architectural style;  material used —not plastic for wood, in cases, 
or masonry; and, also,  design elements.  Or, if there are proposed changes like illuminations to a
building, then we have to choose something that' s sympathetic

Councilmember Williams- Preston interjected, I don' t have a lot of time, so I apologize. I
understand that.  So,  at that time, the building was falling apart. What I' m hearing is that there
were all kinds of activity happening in the building that was a pu blic detriment.  So,  when he
purchased the property,  it was really about making sure that he created a safer space. 

Mr. Klusczinski interjected, To protect it from the elements. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston continued, To prevent deterio ation, but also to protect the
community from illicit activity, and so on and so forth. That firsi kind of initiation was really
about the fact that it' s more important to make sure that this is s fe, versus it being okay to
change whatever needs to be changed. 

I

Mr. Klusczinski responded, There were no changes proposed.  It was just an alteration of

material. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis announced that the time for questioning had officially passed, and
that now the Council was free to make final comments before voting on whether to approve or
deny the Historic Preservation Commission' s recommendation.  Councilmember Davis stated that
Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston would be first to comient, and Councilmember Karen
White would be last. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated, I am inclined to rule in favor of Mr'. Boyd, because — 
based on the information that I read— he wasn' t sure about an afipeals process, and he asked
about that and was not given clarity or information, and was actually told they don' t disclose it. 
This was one ( 1)  of the questions I wanted to ask.  Based on the information I have in here,  I felt
like that was an action that was arbitrary, capricious, and a piece of discretion. Aside from that, I
would also rule in favor of Mr. Boyd because it seems that the B ailding Department was where
the ball was dropped in this process —but it is a part of the proce 3s for getting all the information
to the resident. I think that we have to make sure that we are not holding our citizens responsible
for something that is a responsibility of the City, and the Histori Preservation Commission is an
entity of the City; the Building Department is an entity of the Ci y. Whatever their procedures
are, we have to make sure that they are being followed. I feel liko he was denied a due process, 
which would be a violation of probably something —I' m not a lawyer. But it was certainly
outside of what I understand, especially after this hearing, of thel procedures to be.  So,  I think
that there were some arbitrary and capricious actions, but also actions taken that were outside of
procedure. I also feel that, if we look at this process from beginning to end,  his actions were
certainly made in order to reduce public detriment.  So,  I think that that is something we need to

consider, as well. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly stated, I agree with Ms. Williams-  reston, certainly, in some
regards.  And as I mentioned earlier, I actually had a friend who I ent and got a building permit
for a garage extension. Found out later, once it had virtually gon up, that that height wasn' t
permitted in that neighborhood.  So,  you maybe need to look at s me of these issues with the
Building Department. And, again, I feel for, Mr. Boyd, what yo ' re going through. I do think
that that is a completely separate issue, however, from whether
r not the HPC, with regard to
determining whether or not this gabled roof was appropriate for the building, was arbitrary and
capricious. I think they went through the proper channels to determine that. So,  it' s my
contention that they did not do anything that would fall under that category. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden stated,  The denial of the Certific4e of Appropriateness,  I would
say, is on point here. It seems to me that Mr. Boyd exceeded the authorization that he sought for
the routine maintenance.  The information with the sworn statement was not part of the earlier
record, so we can' t go that direction. So,  based on what was available at the time of the hearing, I
the Group B standards and did
would support the denial of the COA as the changes were beyor
detract from the original form and architecture and integrity of t . s property as a historic
landmark. 

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 2017

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated, It seems to me that, clearly, the ball was dropped with
regards to communication between the Building Department and the HPC with regards to the
five ( 5)  day issue. That, however, doesn' t change the fact that the HPC, I believe, acted
appropriately by issuing a maintenance -only agreement. It' s not their fault that they weren' t
given a notice appropriately,  and when time elapsed and it did come back —the request for a
Certificate of Appropriateness —it' s virtually impossible to give a Certificate of Appropriateness
when it' s inappropriate what was done. Not that it was illegal —and that' s a whole other issue; 
not that it wasn' t a nice design for a person who wants it that way. But the request was for a
Certificate of Appropriateness.  If the flat roof is where it began and it morphed,  I don' t know
how the HPC could issue a Certificate of Appropriateness.  There may be some other mechanism
to arrive there.  I don' t know what it is, but I find that their actions would have been —given the
record that we have — appropriate and in the appropriate manner, and they were doing what was
appropriate, given their statutory responsibilities, as far as preservation. I feel like Mr. Boyd
finds himself in a very difficult situation. Requesting a Certificate of Appropriateness is not the
way to fix it. That does not make it right. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis stated, I had a question regarding the process.  They shared it over
there — there' s two (2)  different ways. At first, they were denying that it was their process, but it
is their process.  If you have two (2)  routes with which you get into your home and one ( 1)  was
messed up, then that' s your fault, and you have a responsibility to take care of that. I think that
process —when you start off wrong, it' s a big problem. I was teaching a class over at IUSB. I got
into the class and, to and behold, when I got there, not one ( 1)  student had a book. Their syllabus
was there. Not one ( 1). 
1 check with the department. They had done everything. Somehow, 
somewhere in the bookstore,  somebody dropped the ball and didn' t order the books.  It was a
summer course,  so we were going fast. By the time the books got in, half my class was going to
be over. Now, what if they have already paid for their course, they' ve already done everything
else?  What are we going to do?  So,  I had to sit there and adjust every single thing in order to
make sure that academics and the core courses were done.  It was a crazy summer, that summer. 
But I had to adjust to make sure.  Could I have fought the department? The department did theirs. 
I did mine. I was prepared. The students were prepared. Somebody down at the bookstore
messed that up. I had to take ownership of that situation, because they did it. They were an
employee of IUSB; I was an employee of IUSB.  So,  I had to adjust my issues so that everything
could be done.  I could sit there and fuss with the students all day long and the only thing they are
going to do is mess up my evaluations. So,  therefore, I adjusted my time because the process
started off day one ( 1)  wrong, and there was no way it was going to end right, unless I made
some modifications that were unusual.  I taught for a long time in my life. Never had that
situation happen. But, in that situation, I had to make tremendous adjustments. And I learned
from there,  every single time, to make sure weeks in advance. I learned a lot from that. So,  yeah, 
it was my situation. I had to take ownership of it. And I think that the combination should have
been made when it comes down to these situations here;  with our procedures. The procedures
went wrong and the wrong things started off from that standpoint.  So,  I cannot support that. 
When it comes to the Building Commissioner, if that' s not right and there was something there, 
that' s a serious situation. There needs to be more clarity when it comes down to that document, 
for six (6)  years.  That has to be done from that standpoint. In the words of my mother, I' m going
to call this " sloppy."  This shouldn' t have gotten here tonight. I will say,  Mr. Boyd, some of the
movementI reckon that you were under a lot of pressure— probably should not have gone as
far as you did. I will say that. Part of that got to the point where, " If these folk are not telling me
right, who cares about it ?" I feel that coming across.  So,  you moved ahead with all that, which
didn' t make everything right. It probably made more people say that they would vote against
you. But the bottom line is that the process started off wrong. I do believe that the ends do not
justify the means.  If the means are wrong, then the end,  nine ( 9)  out of ten ( 10)  times is wrong, 
too. You can' t justify that. Therefore,  I will be in favor of Mr. Boyd. 

Councilmember John Voorde stated, The regulations here are beyond my ability to say what' s
right and wrong. I think there just ought to be a standard of reasonableness applied to this, and I
come down on the opposite side of Mr. Davis and Ms. Preston, because I think that a reasonable
person, when they buy be it a historic landmark or a home or building in a historic district, has
got to know that there are probably all sorts of regulations and limitations to what can be done. 

29

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27, 201

So,  when you have a hole in the roof, and you need to undertake''  ome emergency repair to
preserve the rest of the building, and you are permitted to depart from a standard of one ( 1) 
material to another — that' s a rather small accommodation —as opposed to with that metal roof
permit, saying, " I' m going to put on an addition, and now I' m going to put on a peaked roof..." 
When you buy a historic home or building like this, it' s light fixtures, it's window frames, it' s
trim pieces,  it' s things that sometimes might seem}  ridiculous, but that' s what goes along with
this historic landmark or historic home. A reasonable person knows that. I would say to Mr. 
Boyd that it' s unfortunate, but a reasonable person, before you put a whole bunch of money into
changing the look and style and structure of this home or building —what made it a historic
landmark in the first place —would have made sure that what he is doing is the right thing to do.  I
have not been to many historic preservation hearings in my life, but the couple that I' ve had, I
felt sorry for a guy because he had to change some porch trim at considerable expense. But those
are the rules of the game and you' ve got to play by the rules. You can' t just take carte blanche
and go and do whatever you want just because you think you had the permit or the opportunity to
do so.  So,  I' m going to come down on the opposite side of this. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic stated, I' m inclined to rule in favoof Mr. Boyd. I don' t think the
procedures required by law were observed, whether or not that 4as the fault of HPC. 

Councilmember Karen White stated, I' m reading from page seven ( 7)  of the information that we
received. This states that, first, the HPC did not receive a copy of the building permit application. 

That was filed by Mr. Boyd in October, 2015.  Clearly, it states tevat the guidelines, the timeframe

made a mistake and failed to

was not adhered to and the Building Department admitted that
forward the application. Regardless, whether or not Mr. Boyd N
understanding that that building permit had been approved, the
it was not. There were a lot of procedural issues that I believe r
even before it had been presented at this particular stage of the
any of us would want to say to anyone,  any of our citizens, " W
23, 000."  I think there could have been a better way, but, regar
what we have before us,  and I will be supporting Mr. Boyd. 

operating under the
ord clearly acknowledges that
y should have been addressed
eal process.  I don' t think that
you just have to eat the
ss,  what we have before us is

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to deny the recoi
Preservation Commission, based on the fact that procedures re
Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion which tied
and four (4)  nays ( Councilmembers Randy Kelly, Jo M. Brod( 
Voorde). 

endation of the Historic
red by law were not observed. 
roll call vote of four (4)  ayes
Dr. David Varner, and John

DeRose were familiar with
As neither the members of the Council nor Interim Council A
the interpretation of a tied vote in this particular quasi-judicial format, Ms. DeRose proposed to
notify the Council, the HPC, and Mr. Boyd of the final interpretation of the vote once due
research had been completed. 

i

I

NEW BUSINESS

There was no new business this evening. 

PRIVILEGE OF THE FLOOR

been in contact with the Legal
3)  different City Attorneys, 

Jesse Davis, P. O.  Box 10205,  South Bend, IN, stated that he h, 
Department, has submitted multiple FOIA' s,  has dealt with tlu
and a State Police detective to try and get information regardin
to the City mysteriously in 2015.  Mr. Davis stated that the last
Legal Department, on January 14th,  2016,  stated that the State
closed and that it had been turned over to another entity. He was told that once the investigation
had closed, he would receive the information that he requested. He stated that he wanted to know
why, after two (2)  years, he still has not received the information. Mr. Davis stated, If I need to
file a complaint with the State, I will do so,  but I think the Cou cil should be able to solve these

ice he had with the
on the matter had

the equipment that was returned

problems. 

30

REGULAR MEETING

FEBRUARY 27,  2017

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street,  South Bend,  IN, explained that the trash situation on his
street is sub - ideal. Mr. Brown explained the trashmen cannot pick up trash totes unless they are
two (2)  feet off the curb,  due to the parking situation on his street. This introduces another
problem in that after the totes have been emptied, the wind can knock them over, making them a
street hazard.  He urged the Council to have someone look at the situation and solve it. 

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business to come before the Council, President Tim Scott adjourned the
meeting at 12: 16 a.m. 

31

