CD

o

o CD

yx o

MD-, 

0

z

r

o
z

y

y

y

y

y

y

y

y y

r

r

r

c y
o

uo
td p

z

a
m

z

z

a
m

a
m

z

z

a
m

C 
C° 

N

r-+ 

Q1 N

cn

cl, 

n

n

P 

CD

CD

o  

0

0

0

N C, 
0

b 

Cd

o

m

DO

m

m

m

m

m

a

m

y
w
CA

y

t

t

N

N

N
O

N
O

1
1

C

C

CIO

CIO

y
x

y
x

r

r

r
r

r
r

H

H

b

b

a

a

cn

cn

z

y

z

y

11

11

REPORT OF SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

TO THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND: 

THE SUB - COMMITTEE HAS INSPECTED THE MINUTES OF THE

March 29,  2016

MEETING OF THE COUNCIL AND FOUND THEM TO BE CORRECT. 

THEREFORE, WE RECOMMEND THE SAME BE APPROVED: 

TIM SCOTT

ID VARNER

APPROVED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL ON: 

April 11,  2016

ATTEST: 

KAP& EMAH FOWLE ,  CITY CLERK

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend,  Indiana met in the
Council Chambers of the County -City Building on Tuesday, March 29, 2016 at 7: 00 p.m. The
meeting was called to order by Council President Tim Scott and the Invocation and Pledge to the
Flag were given. 

ROLL CALL

COUNCIL MEMBERS: 

Tim Scott
Regina Williams- Preston
Randy Kelly
Josephine Broden
Dr. David Varner
Oliver J.  Davis
John Voorde
Gavin Ferlic
Karen L. White

OTHERS PRESENT: 

1St District, President
2nd District
3rd District

4th District
5th District

6th District, Vice President
At -Large

At- Large,  Chairperson Committee of the Whole
At -Large

Kathleen Cekanski - Farrand
Adriana Rodriguez
Kareemah Fowler

Jennifer Coffinan
Alkeyna Aldridge
Joseph Molnar

Council Attorney
Legal Research Assistant
City Clerk
Chief Deputy Clerk
Deputy Clerk
Clerk Executive Assistant

REPORT FROM THE SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion that the minutes of the March 10 2016 meeting of
the Council be accepted and placed on file. Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion
which carried by a voice vote of nine (9)  ayes. 

SPECIAL BUSINESS

REPORTS OF CITY OFFICES

Representing the city administration will be Mayor Pete Buttigieg and James Mueller. 

RESOLVE INTO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

At 7: 04 p.m. Councilmember Karen White made a motion to resolve into the Committee of the
Whole. Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of nine
9)  ayes.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chairperson, presiding. 

Due to Bill 11 - 16 being presented by Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, the role of Chairperson of
Committee of the Whole was filled by Council Vice President Oliver Davis. Councilmember
Oliver Davis explained the procedures to be followed for tonight' s meeting in accordance with
Article 1,  Section 2 -11 of the South Bend Municipal Code. 

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

Council Vice President Oliver Davis asked the Council Attorney about how long members of the
public can speak in opposition and in favor of a particular bill. 

Council Attorney Kathleen Cekanski- Farrand stated regarding time limits on public input the
favorable side will speak first. If the side in favor of the motion speaks for more than thirty (30) 
minutes the opposition will get to speak as long as the people in favor spoke.  If the side in favor
speak for less than thirty (30)  minutes the opposition can speak no longer than thirty (30) 

minutes. 

PUBLIC HEARINGS

11 - 16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
SOUTH BEND COMMON COUNCIL AMENDING

CHAPTER 14 OF THE SOUTH BEND MUNICIPAL
CODE BY ESTABLISHING NEW ARTICLE 13
ENTITLED SMOKE FREE AIR REGULATIONS FOR
WORKPLACES AND PUBLIC PLACES

Councilmember John Voorde reported that the Health and Public Safety Committee met and
sends this bill to the full Council without recommendation. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to accept the second substitute bill on file in the
City Clerk' s Office. Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice
vote of nine (9)  ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic served as the presenter and petitioner of this bill. Councilmember
Ferlic gave a presentation on the benefits of smoke free work places,  the power point is on file in
the City Clerk' s Office. 

Councilmember Ferlic thanked his co- sponsors Councilmembers Jo M. Broden, Randy Kelly and
John Voorde. He also thanked everyone on both sides who came out to discuss this important
issue. He asked that the people in support of Bill 11 - 16 please be respectful and kind of everyone
throughout the evening. 

The second substitute ordinance has two primary changes.  The first change regards the wording
about spacing and open windows due to a legal opinion they received. The second change was
pushing back the implementation date to January 2nd 2017. After hearing from business owners, 
it was clear that it was important to provide a long implementation period so that businesses
could adjust properly to this change and remain successful. 

Over fifty (50)  percent of the United States population is covered by comprehensive clean air
policies, including 802 cities in the United States that are not covered by state -wide bans. 
Indianapolis, Fort Wayne, Bloomington, and Elkhart all have comprehensive clean air policies
along with over seventy -five (75)  percent of the sixty (60)  largest cities in the United States. 
Councilmember Ferlic stated he is asking for the passage of this bill to protect public health both
for patrons to these establishments and the employees. Second hand smoke contains hundreds of
toxic chemicals and about seventy (70)  that are carcinogenic, including carbon monoxide, 
hydrogen cyanide, and arsenic. Secondhand smoke can cause among smokers and non - smokers
heart disease, lung disease,  cancer, and stroke. Approximately 600,000 people die each year
worldwide from secondhand smoke. 

Regarding second hand aerosol, the byproduct of e- cigarettes and vaping, at least ten ( 10) 
chemicals identified in ESD aerosol are carcinogens and toxins, including benzene, 
formaldehyde and nicotine. The World Health Organization as well as the National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health recommend that e- cigarettes not be used indoors or in

workplaces. 

South Bend will be far from the first city to pass this type of ordinance and far from the first city
to implement such an ordinance, we have the benefit of studying other communities and the
health benefits these ordinances bring. A national study of counties where at least fifty (50) 

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

percent of a county' s population was covered by a comprehensive ban saw a twenty (20) percent
reduction in heart attacks, an eleven ( 11)  percent reduction in pulmonary disease. When the
country of Scotland decided to implement comprehensive clean air, they saw a seventeen ( 17) 
percent reduction of heart attacks and coronary infection. In just the first year when New York
passed a clean air ordinance they saw an eight ( 8)  percent decrease in hospital admissions for
heart attacks and a $ 56 million dollar decrease in hospital costs. These are statistics but every
one of those numbers is a human being.  So when you have a twenty (20) percent reduction in
heart attacks that means many did not have a heart attack that would have without a clean air
ordinance.  The health benefits of clean air are undeniable and we expect to see the same results

in South Bend. 

Some people make the argument that it is an adult' s decision in where they work and where they
patronize businesses.  However, we don' t use the same logic when a business or factory has
dangerous levels of carbon monoxide. We don' t just tell workers that you' re an adult you can
make a choice to work in that factory and we don' t tell members of the public that if they' re
going to be shopping at a store with dangerous levels of carbon monoxide that they can simply
make a choice as an adult. We know the dangers of these chemicals and we have laws that
protect the public and laws that protect workers from things like carbon monoxide. 

Again, South Bend is far from the first city to look into a comprehensive air ordinance and the
vast majority of economic research concludes there is no negative economic impact to a clean air
ordinance. These studies are academic, peer reviewed, and published in highly respected
journals. There are some other tobacco industry funded outlier studies that say the opposite but
the vast majority of research regarding economics is that these ordinances do not have an effect
on business. 

There is a recent CDC study from 2013,  which was the most comprehensive study to date on this
issue,  which looked at 216 cities in eight ( 8)  states without statewide smoke -free air laws. This is
similar to the situations South Bend would be in if we were to adopt this ordinance. The study
stated unequivocally that smoke free laws did not have an adverse economic impact and it
provided a small economic benefit to cities in one ( 1)  state.  This study cited over twenty -two
22)  individual studies that confirmed that exact same research. More importantly, smoke -free
laws improve both employee and general population health. 

The Indiana State Department of Health estimates the cost of secondhand smoke at $ 20 million
dollars for the City of South Bend on annual basis. 

Other communities who have adopted smoke free ordinances have had no trouble enforcing them
because primarily these ordinances are self - enforcing. People follow the law and as a result
citations are really not needed. For example, the City of Indianapolis had over four hundred
400)  affected establishments and in the first year they issued around three ( 3)  citations. When
laws are passed people follow the law. For South Bend, a volunteer phone -line established by
Smoke Free St. Joe will help take away any burden from Code Enforcement. If a number of calls
are received regarding an establishment, Code Enforcement will go take a look at the property. If
a violation is found, the first penalty is simply a warning. If that business is only open after 5: 00
p.m. they will coordinate the Police Dept. potentially using the volunteer police officers to go out
and make a check to enforce. Again over time these ordinances are self - enforcing. Both Code
Enforcement and the Police Department sent a letter stating they were comfortable with the
ordinance and its expectations of them and that letter is on file in the City Clerk' s Office. 

Indiana Code has given municipalities an express right to pass an ordinance that is more
comprehensive than the state law. Many ordinances have been challenged in the past due to their
exemptions, to prevent such a challenge this bill contains no exemptions. We are going to protect
all workers and were going to protect the public everywhere. Any sort of indoor workplace will
be covered by clean air policy. Some may cite the Evansville case from 2011,  but their ordinance
was overturned because they provided exemptions without stating good reason to do so and they
did not include a severability clause. This bill does have a severability clause to preserve the
remainder of the ordinance if it is challenged and any provision is found unconstitutional only
that provision would be invalidated. This ordinance was reviewed extensively by national and
state legal experts and found this ordinance is valid. 

3

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

In terms of helping the businesses affected by the ordinance there will be support available for
them including the extended implementation time to January 2nd 2017.  Smoke Free St. Joe will
provide four (4)  scheduled marketing seminars,  the administration will help with permitting for
letting the bars invest in outdoor patios and the process will be as easy as possible, marketing
support from American Lung Association and Smoke Free St. Joe in terms of social media
promotion for any bars that might decide to go smoke free before the implementation date, as
well as help with signage and education regarding the ordinance. 

One argument that has been heard is the case of the City of Elkhart and the possible negative
effect the smoking ban had in Elkhart. Councilmember Ferlic asked that the Council not rely on
any anecdotal evidence but instead rely on academic scientific research that looks into many
different factors. Elkhart' s smoking ban was passed immediately before the Great Recession and
Elkhart had the third highest unemployment rate in the entire country during that time. If any sort
ofbusinesses suffered during that time period it clearly was for multiple reasons. At the time the
ordinance was passed Elkhart was already seeing a decline in employment. Concerning the
rebound of employment in Elkhart, Leisure &  Hospitality employment levels are higher than
they were when the ordinance was passed. 

Councilmember Ferlic cautioned the Council against viewing anecdotal evidence and instead
look at the academic and peer reviewed studies. He provided the case of Plainfield IN which saw
their food and beverage tax revenue grow despite the recession and town' s ban on smoking in
public places to show anyone can bring anecdotal evidence forward to tell the story they want. 

Councilmember Ferlic addressed the questions brought forward during the Health and Public
Safety Committee. Regarding Elkhart it is important to note that correlation does not equal
causation. Ice cream used to be thought to cause polio because there was a spike in polio for kids
during the summer months. Now clearly polio is not caused by ice cream. This is an example of
correlation does not equal causation. 

In South Bend during that time, even though the recession hit us less hard than Elkhart, bars and
restaurants did close. Those bars and restaurants closed even though we currently allow smoke at

those establishments. 

Regarding the questions on home offices and the impact of this ordinance on them. If a home is
operating as a business and has employees and is open to the public then yes this ordinance
would apply. If it is someone simply sitting inside their own home, working on a computer, 
running their own business this would not apply to them. 

There were claims that research has been debunked on economics and invalidated. For every one
1)  study showing a potentially negative economic affect there are ten ( 10)  studies saying the
opposite. The CDC study cites twenty -two (22)  different articles that back the position that these
ordinances have no adverse effects economically. 

Regarding the question on whether this ordinance will affect the casino, any casino organized by
the Pokagon Band would not be in the City of South Bend. It would be on sovereign land and the
decisions for that land would be made by the Tribal Council.  Councilmember Ferlic stated he has
reached out to the tribal leaders many times and requested several meetings to encourage going
smoke free as there are many casinos in the U.S.  who don' t allow smoking. He encourages them
for the benefit of their workers and the people who enter their casino, if it is built, that it be
smoke free. 

Councilmember Ferlic stated he received a checklist from Smoke Free St. Joe who reached out to
every bar and affected establishment. He stated he personally called every single bar and retail
establishment, he did not talk to some but he did leave a message when he could. It was a
Saturday from noon on until he called each one. He stated he had several meetings with bar
owners and always said he would be available to meet them. 

Some people have asked about possible exemptions for retail tobacco and vape shops.  This
ordinance is designed to promote public health to provide clean air to all public areas and all
employees in South Bend. Exemptions for certain businesses would not be a way to advance
public health. Yes some cities do exempt those establishments but some, like San Francisco, do
not. If we are looking for this ordinance to reduce as many cancers as possible,  as many cases of

4

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

heart disease as possible, and as many heart attacks as possible then providing certain
exemptions would run counter to that goal. 

Regarding vaping, Councilmember Ferlic stated he has talked to a number of vape shop owners
and their state lobby group. They provided a number of different studies citing vaping is not
harmful but they seem to be industry funded. The World Health Organization,  Food and Drug
Administration and National Institutes for Occupational Safety and Health have all provided
recommendations on vaping and do not recommend it indoors or in the workplace. 

Councilmember Ferlic asked the City Council Attorney to address the question regarding the
substitute bill and whether proper procedure was followed. 

Council Attorney Kathleen Cekanski - Farrand stated proper procedure was followed for Bill 11- 
16 and the two substitute bills. The original bill was filed on Wednesday March 9th prior to the
noon deadline on that date. That filing satisfied all standards on a filing and properly accepted by
the Office of the City Clerk. Sometime thereafter the Clerk' s office gave the filing Bill Number
11 - 16 and placed on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled Common Council meeting for
first reading and set for public hearing for this evening and referred to the Health and Public
Safety Committee. The first reading of the bill is only the title of the bill. City Clerk Kareemah
Fowler read the title of Bill 11 - 16.  That title has not been amended,  only if the title has been
amended does the procedure start over because it would have to be republished by the Clerk' s
staff. The procedures of both substitute filings were completed properly. The Council has their
responsibility to see if reasonable steps were taken with regard to their analysis. 

Councilmember Ferlic stated nothing in this ordinance prohibit tobacco shops or vape shops
from selling their products on a retail basis and they are welcomed to do so in South Bend. What
this ordinance protects is from smoking indoors. Regarding flavoring for e- cigarettes, there is a
Harvard study from 2015 showing the flavoring within vaping solutions is carcinogenic. 

Councilmember Ferlic acknowledged there is going to be fear with any sort of change and that is
understandable. Four (4)  years ago there was a lot of fear regarding the GLBT Equality
ordinance and there were people then afraid about any negative impacts on business. Similar to
now, we relied on research and on data and experiences from other communities and did what

was right for South Bend. We want businesses to succeed in South Bend and we want people to
be healthy and reduce cancer, heart disease, and lung disease. This ordinance can help us achieve
both goals.  Everyone has been affected in some way by heart disease, lung disease, and cancer. 
These are brutal diseases,  yes sometimes they happen without exposure to secondhand smoke but
we do know that second hand smoke tremendously increases the chance of these diseases.  We
can take a major step here tonight to reduce those diseases and save people' s lives. 

Council Vice President Davis asked if any of the Councilmembers had questions for
Councilmember Ferlic at this time. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden stated she has no questions based on months and months of
research on this topic and going back to before when it was before the state legislature. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner stated this is the third time we have discussed this and not much has

changed to the proposal. 

Council Vice President Oliver Davis asked regarding the City of Indianapolis and Fort Wayne if
they were unigov and the County and City governments were combined. 

Councilmember Ferlic stated the City of Indianapolis is but there are distinct municipal entities
within the city that are separate and do not fall under the ordinance. Fort Wayne and Allen
County are not unigov and actually the town of New Haven is right next to Fort Wayne. 

Council Vice President asked if the Indianapolis ordinance covers all of Marion County. 

Councilmember Ferlic responded no it does not cover some areas that are not part of their unigov
system.  He stated he does not know the percentage of how much is not covered. He asked if
anyone from Smoke Free St. Joe had that information to bring it forward during their time to
speak. We are not just looking at Indianapolis and Fort Wayne. 

5

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

Council Vice President Oliver Davis asked the supporters of the Bill to find the numbers for the
percentage of Allen and Marion counties not affected by the city smoking bans. He asked
Councilmember Ferlic if there is any reason for why the bars in the city of Elkhart closed but the
businesses in the county of Elkhart did not close. 

Councilmember Ferlic stated he had no confirmation that evidence is true. 

Council Vice President stated he has been given information that during this recession the
Elkhart County area did not lose any bars but the City did under the ban. 

Councilmember Ferlic stated he does not know if that is verified and he can' t speak for why that
would happen. There is a wealth of data analyzing many cities in similar situations to South
Bend that it does not have an economic impact. 

Council Vice President Davis stated he is trying to focus on Indiana cities and specifically the
ones closest to them, which would be Elkhart, and we have done no studies on Elkhart or on the
potential impact on South Bend. He asked the supporters or anyone who would answer why did
that city get negatively impacted by a smoke free ordinance when all the national studies said
that would not happen. 

Councilmember Ferlic stressed that we should look at the viable research on this issue that can
isolate certain factors to really determine what happened when these ordinances were passed. 

The public was given an opportunity to speak in favor and opposition of the bill. 

Those wishing to speak in favor to Bill 11 - 16: 

Mayor Pete Buttigieg, Offices on the 14th Floor of the County City Building, stated as Mayor he
is responsible for both the public safety and economic direction of South Bend. He has been
following this debate closely and hearing from the public on both sides of the issue. In reviewing
the bill, there are things the Mayor stated he likes about the bill and things he does not like but
this is clearly a move in the right direction. If it passes it will be signed and enforced effectively. 
The lead departments charged with enforcement have all stated without issue they could enforce
this bill if it becomes ordinance. 

There are three (3)  reasons for why he intends to sign the legislation ifpassed by the Council. 
The first reason is public safety. Any tradeoff between safety and liberty deserves to be taken
seriously but here the case for safety is very clear. Research tells us secondhand smoke will kill
an average of fourteen ( 14)  people in the City of South Bend this year alone. That is just non- 
smokers. If we knew of any threat that was going to kill over a dozen residents of South Bend
and injure many more in a single year, we would of course act to stop it. Just like seat belts, 
restaurant inspections, or building inspections it is a tradeoff in personal liberty that we accept in
order to save lives. 

The second reason is to reinforce South Bend' s standing as a leading community. We have all
been working hard together to place South Bend ahead of our peers, but in his respect we are
behind. South Bend is the last of the five (5)  major Indiana communities to enact such
protections. Eighty (80)  percent of Americans already live under some kind of smoking bans and
fifty (50)  percent live under one that bans smoking in all restaurants and all bars. We are
uncharacteristically behind the times. This is not an experimental policy and we don' t have to
speculate on the effects because such policies are already the law of the land for most
Americans.  His office was not able to find a single case of an American city that moved in the
opposite direction. If this were such a bad idea you would expect that at least some of those cities
would have decided to repeal their smoking ban. We found no evidence of any community that
chose to go from smoke free back to the old way. 

Third, the Mayor stated he has tremendous confidence in the bars and restaurants in this City. If
it were not for that confidence he would not be comfortable signing this legislation. Both as a
Mayor and a resident he has enormous appreciation for what these businesses mean to our
community. Hospitality and retail have never been an easy line ofbusiness to be in. Any
disruptive change can be a threat to them but he has enormous confidence in these businesses. 
He does not expect to see them fail where others have succeeded. If a law like this did not ruin

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

the industry in Indianapolis, Fort Wayne, Evansville, or Hamilton County then our small
businesses should do even better. 

The research is very clear on this issue.  The Mayor thanked the Council for creating a longer
implementation time for compliance and added his administration will seek out ways to support
affected businesses throughout the transition. No one likes being told what to do but that' s how
laws passed by elected officials work in American democratic elected processes. It is time for
South Bend to join the rest of the county and recognize a choice between public health and small
business is a false choice. This is an emotional issue but we make decisions based on evidence, 
especially life and death decisions.  He thanked the Council for their work, diligence, and
leadership on this issue. 

Tony Flora, 202 E.  Angela South Bend,  spoke not only as a resident but also in his capacity as
the President of the AFL -CIO for our area. In about a month we will be having an event at the
Workers Memorial site at Howard Park to recognize the passage of the Occupational Safety and
Health Act in 1970,  when for the first time in our country we said it was a basic right of all
workers to have safe and healthy work places. We also began at that time to establish fair and
scientific standards to constitute safe work places and what did not. We have continued to
expand those rights and that understanding. There is no argument today that secondhand smoke
is not detrimental to people' s health. He spoke for employees and people who would want to be
an employee of one of these businesses. Never should a worker have to choose between making
a living and giving up some of their health because that is the essential argument tonight. Our
state finally passed legislation that work places should be smoke free but they carved out a little
exception and community by community we have to address it. It is time for South Bend to say
all workplaces should be healthy workplaces.  Secondhand smoke is an impediment to
employment and a problem for those people who want to be employees. We do not argue that an
employee can make it a choice and work in a less healthy work environment and we don' t say
we will allow some businesses to have free floating asbestos or some places to have high
amounts of silicon dust and you make that choice to work there. The time is now to address this
one last area of where people work. 

Mike Sabith,  5629 Slerting Dr. Granger, stated he is new to the community and has been here for
four (4)  years.  He is a cardiothoracic surgeon who is here to talk about public health risks of
secondhand smoke. Back in 1919 the first case of lung cancer, at that time the disease was
unheard of and no one thought they would see it again.  In 1936 the association between lung
cancer and smoking was first brought forward even though those doctors were castigated at the
time It took thirty (30)  years until the Surgeon General actually made the association between
smoking and lung cancer. We have had twenty (20)  million Americans die from lung cancer in
the fifty (50)  years since the Surgeon General made that report. Two and a half million
Americans have died from second hand smoke during that time. Ninety (90)  percent of his
practice is related to smoking related diseases.  The only economic impact you will see from this
is that it will put me out of business and that' s a good thing. The only people that don' t think this
is a health risk are those in the tobacco industry and those that smoke. He encourages the Council
to pass this bill. 

Sam McGrath, Radiation Oncologist at the Memorial Regional Cancer Center, thanked the
Council for allowing him to speak about the dangers of secondhand smoke.  His position on this
issue is shared by all five (5)  of the oncologists within the Beacon Medical Group. Secondhand
smoke is one of the silent public health crisis of our era. As was stated before two and a half

million Americans have died from secondhand smoke exposure and this year alone 42, 000
Americans will die from secondhand smoke. It also goes beyond lung cancer, secondhand smoke
exposure exacerbates asthma,  contributes to heart disease and stroke, and can increase
susceptibility to contracting tuberculosis. Dr. McGrath stated he has treated a bartender in a
smoking establishment whose biggest concern was not the cancer they were dealing with but
repeated mucus plugs within their lungs. He has treated a musician who contracted cancer of the
larynx due to the secondhand smoke he received during his performances. The physicians in
oncology can tell the Council story after story of similar instances and they are all absolutely
heart breaking. The economic effects of smoking also need to be discussed.  Smoking related
illness within the United States costs us more than $ 300 billion dollars each year, $ 170 billion

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

for direct medical care and $ 156 billion in lost productivity. That included $ 5. 6 billion in lost
productivity from secondhand smoke. It is incumbent upon all of us to protect the health of the
general public and individuals working in establishments where smoking is allowed many of
whom absolutely need the employment and some of whom who have few other job alternatives. 
He is not suggesting that the right to smoke is taken away but that we act to protect those who
choose not to smoke.  If we can acknowledge ones right not to smoke we must also support one' s

right to breath clean air. 

Steve Toepp, 52762 Brookdale Dr. South Bend, is a musician in three (3)  bands and all twenty
20)  musicians in those bands as well as hundreds of others he has spoken to are really hoping
that this bill will pass. Musicians, especially local ones,  are not rich and cannot afford to turn
down work at some places. We have to take everything we can get. He stated his opposition to
big government but in his mind the government' s role is to protect people.  It is getting so bad in
some of these bars that they can barely get through two (2)  sets.  They post their shows on
Facebook and the first question always asked is if the bar is smoking or non - smoking and we
don' t like to say if it is smoking because we will get a smaller crowd then. He estimated they get
approximately forty (40)  percent less of their normal crowd if it is at a smoking bar. The bars
will get more people to his bands performances if they are all non - smoking. 

Kelli Brien,  115 E. Woodside St.  South Bend, spoke as a business owner working in public
health for almost nine (9)  years.  Clients come in everyday with issues about their pregnancies
and will secondhand smoke affect them.  St. Joseph County has one of the very highest infant
mortality rates in our country. This ordinance can help that rate. Both secondhand and thirdhand
smoke affects children and babies. This is a very high indicator in SIDS. 

Amy Nuner, 6115 Miami Rd., stated in 2003 when New York City passed their non - smoking
ordinance she lived there and worked in the hospitality industry and it did not affect her income
in anyway. Also she lived in Chicago when they passed their non - smoking ordinance and it did
not have a negative effect on bars. Having three (3)  small kids she hopes when they are adults
they don' t have to go through this fight. 
Victoria Zellmer, 1233 N. Eddy St. Apt 303,  stated she loves South Bend and it has become her
home over the past eight (8)  years.  She is a PHD candidate at the University of Notre Dame
studying cancer but is not speaking on the science and health risks of smoking because that has
been well covered. She came to talk about what it is like to go out in a non -smoke free city as a
twenty something who goes to bars frequently. First she supports this bill out of concern for this
community so the workers and employers have the right to clean air. Also this ordinance will
provide a healthy image for our city, this ordinance will show South Bend cares for and protects
all residents and all employees in the City. This ordinance will also encourage the young
professionals in the City to come out to new and different establishments. She stated she is less
likely to frequent a bar, and here friends are also less likely to frequent a bar, ifit is a smoking
establishment. This ordinance is a positive way to connect young professionals with this amazing

city. 
Craig Clark, 3267 Chalk Maple Ct. South Bend, spoke on behalf of the Indiana Black Expo
expressed their organizations support of a strong smoke free air ordinance in South Bend. We
advocate for smoke free air laws because of the disproportionate impact that it would have on
African Americans.  These workers being protected will be the most vulnerable in our society. 
Unfortunately many African American workers in Indiana work in low paying jobs where
smoking is the norm. Saying that these workers have a choice to walk away from these jobs is a
false assertion. 

Isis Dixon, 1021 E Irvington Ave, stated she had a grandmother who smoke for many years and
even though she stopped smoking she still ended up suffering from that. While her grandmother
had a choice as a child she did not have a choice to be around her and take in that secondhand
smoke. If this ordinance helps stop people smoking or helps people never start smoking so they
don' t affect their family members then it will be worth it. 
Kevin O' Flarrerty, 178 Housatome Drive, CT, is a regional advocacy director for the campaign
Tobacco Free Kids. In that capacity he covers eleven ( 11)  states throughout the U.S.  including
Indiana. He was asked to talk specifically about the legal aspects of the ordinance. Tobacco Free

8

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

Kids strongly supports this ordinance and this bill is set up properly by presenting a
comprehensive ordinance that provides exceptions to certain industries. This protects all workers
and all businesses.  The stumbling points for other city ordinances in the past is providing
exceptions to some work places, by not having that this ordinance is better written. By saying
this a threat to all workers and protecting all workers equally that problem is avoided. In all the
cases he has been a part of where the ordinance was written comprehensively like this they have
been upheld fully. This bill has been reviewed by three (3)  independent attorneys and all have
found this proposed law one that would hold up against a legal challenge. Regarding e- cigarettes, 
while they are a relatively new product, a third of the states that have comprehensive smoke free
laws include e- cigarettes in their smoke free laws.  There is no question based on the evidence
today that e- cigarettes are safer than normal cigarettes but that does not mean that they are safe. 
This would help rid all workplaces of pollutants and carcinogens. Based on the current science, 
all major health organizations recommend e- cigarettes be included in smoke free laws. 
Economically what the data shows is what usually happens is that for a month or so after these
laws there is a little bit of a blip in revenue for these bars but then that city goes back on
whatever trend it was on before. If business was going up it continues to go up, if business was
going down it continues-to go down, unfortunately for Elkhart that was the situation they were in
when they passed that law. You should look at the empirical data if you want good data. No
matter where this fight takes place it is always the same fight, the health community comes out
and talks about public health while the business community comes out and talks about their fears
of losing business but the reality is five (5)  or ten ( 10)  years from now all of you who vote for
this ordinance will look back and say it' s one of the best things you did as councilmembers. Also
if past experience is any indication a good chunk of people wearing the red shirts (opposition) 
will have changed their mind too. 

Traci Kennedy, Columbia Missouri, she works for an organization titled Americans for Non
Smoker' s Rights. All workers deserve the right to breathe clean air at work no matter where they
work. This is a public health issue but also there is a negative economic impact on South Bend
due to second hand smoke. The reality is the Tobacco Industry are spending $288 million dollars
to recruit Indiana youth to become addicted to their products and they are not offering to recoup
the cost for building fires, maintenance and cleaning, and worker' s sick leave. They are not
offering any assistance to these businesses that then have to foot the bill to pay for exposure to
smoke and secondhand smoke. We know that smoke free laws save both lives and money for the
communities they are enacted in and they are not only popular in the beginning but they also
grow in popularity over time after being enacted. 

Nick Torez, works for the American Lung Association in Indianapolis,  spoke about the questions
regarding Elkhart. At the request of Councilmember Ferlic they reached out to the Alcohol and
Tobacco Commission for the state of Indiana to request data to show the alcohol permits for the
city of Elkhart. In the short time they have had they have tried to compare the data from the state
to the list provided by the opponents of the ordinance. There are several discrepancies on the list
provided by the opponents and this goes to the question of relying on anecdotal evidence to base
some of these decisions on. In particular several of the bars listed on the sheet are still listed by
the state as having active liquor licenses and several were listed as having gone out ofbusiness
before the ordinance was enacted in Elkhart. It calls into question some of the anecdotes we have
been asked to rely on. Also this sheet does not show any of the new bars opened in Elkhart since
the ordinance passed.  Manufacturing was a huge loss for Elkhart during the recession and that
had an enormous impact on the bar industry there. The Elkhart Truth posted a moving article
about the effects of the recession in Elkhart and quoted one of the bar owners after the ordinance
went into effect saying business had been very hard but he did not cite the smoking ordinance he
cited that all of the shift workers from the manufacturing sector were out of work. To answer
Councilmember Oliver Davis' s question the Indianapolis ordinance covers ninety -two (92) 
percent of the population of Marion County. 

Latonya Green,  1028 Ebeling Dr. South Bend IN., stated it is clear the dangers of secondhand
smoke fifty -nine ( 59)  people from our community will die each year due to secondhand smoke. 
We must honor their memory by protecting all workers regardless of where they work. All
residents of South Bend deserve to work, study and play in a smoke free environment. This
ordinance will not only protect health immediately it will also motivate people to quit smoking

0

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29.  2016

and reduce the number of people who start smoking. The research is clear and the time is now to
protect all workers. 

Karl Nichols,  1530 College St.,  spoke about the assistance Smoke Free St. Joe would offer any
business affected by the ordinance. He focused on the implementation benefits that Smoke Free
St. Joe was willing to provide to the affected businesses during the implementation period. They
would help in three main ways including community education,  event promotion, and marketing
workshops. This would include sending implementation tool kits to all affected businesses.  They
would set up a smoke free hotline which would answer questions about the new law, provide
information about compliance and other resources.  They would help with daily and weekly
advertisements about the new law prior to enforcement dates.  They would coordinate with the
Common Council to identify early implementers who would be interested in promotion from
Smoke Free St.  Joe and have the Smoke Free St. Joe monthly meetings at some of the early
adopters'  bars. Promote events and bars on the Smoke Free St.  Joe social media sites and
interview and profile one business per month. They would hold at least four (4)  two (2)  hour
marketing workshops for the affected businesses regarding marketing via social media, branding
and promoting the venue, event planning, and expanding the customer base.  Smoke Free St. Joe
wants this potential transition to be positive for anyone involved. 

Jonathan Anderstorm, 526 W Western Ave., stated there are parts of this ordinance that he has
questions about such as the inclusion of volunteers as employees as well as the enforcement on
non - profits should a complaint be filed. He does however support the ordinance for three ( 3) 
reasons.  First, as the Executive Director of the Monroe Circle Community Center in South Bend
he has a daily reminder of the adverse effects of smoking on this community. Many people have
limited options when it comes to employment and many feel their only choice is to work in any
place they can find even if it is a smoking establishment. He also sees the results of children who
experience the adverse effects of secondhand smoking. This ordinance would prohibit smoking
in public housing areas.  Secondly, many of the negative affects of secondhand smoke on our city
are preventable and our City is in dire need of health protection. Third, people are God' s treasure
and every person here has eternal value and worth, this ordinance will help extend people' s time
on earth as long as possible. Yes some may not agree with me but it is hard to keep doing
funerals for people dying for heart disease or for a child born six (6)  months premature because
his mother was a smoker. Yes this may cause some people some personal trouble it has great
potential to extend the greatest gift God has given us which is human life. 

Council Vice President Davis announced the opposition will have forty (40)  minutes to speak. 

Council President Tim Scott made a motion to recess for five (5)  minutes. Councilmember Karen
White seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of nine (9)  ayes. 

The Committee of the Whole recessed at 8: 41 p.m. 

The Committee of the Whole reconvened with Council Vice President presided with nine (9) 
members present at 8: 46 p.m. 

Those wishing to speak in opposition to Bill 11 - 16: 

Frank Julian,  1620 South Bend Ave, stated those speaking in favor of this bill have already won
this issue.  It is not hard in this county to find a place ofbusiness or restaurant that is smoke free. 
He stated he had to sit down and think of any bars or restaurants that still allow smoking when he
was first approached about this. This is no longer the public health issue these statistics make it
out to be and the data presented today proves that with widely different claims ofhow many
people would die from secondhand smoke in our area. That data Councilmember Ferlic has used
have been debunked as not being of sound basis and that was stated in the Journal of the
American Medical Association. This is going to drive people from these bars to the bars in St. 
Joseph County and Mishawaka. This is going to drive people to the casino and it is funny that the
Mayor wants to talk about public safety but takes $ 2 million dollars from the casino. The studies
that showed no economic impact were mostly done in southern states where it is easy to have an
outside facility where people can smoke. South Bend is not like that where most of the year
patrons cannot comfortably be outside on a patio. The economic studies also look at tax data and
those studies do show it all equals out because T.G.1 Friday or Applebees will take in more

10

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

money when they go smoke free but studies have also shown that individual businesses, small
business, get devastated by these smoking bans. When we come in a year from now these
businesses will not be here and it is not anecdotal what happened in Elkhart. Anecdotal evidence
is not an expert in the field saying there were thirty -eight (38)  taverns in the city of Elkhart that
were in business and that there are only fourteen ( 14)  businesses left now. Those are facts. If
these businesses even lose ten ( 10)  percent of their gross income they will go out of business, 
they have a very thin margin and this will take it away because you want to enforce your
morality on other people. You don' t smoke so you don' t want anybody to smoke and that' s all
this is because there are not enough businesses here to have such a public health impact. Also the
health impact for smoking and secondhand smoke is not as bad as Councilmember Ferlic made
out. 

James A. Masters, 350 Columbia St. South Bend,  spoke on the behalf of Richman Master
Distributor Inc. They are a wholesale distributor of products for grocery and convenience stores
including tobacco products. They have 320 employees company wide and operates fifty -three
53)  Low Bob' s tobacco stores in the South Bend metropolitan area.  Six ( 6)  of those Low Bob' s
are in the city limits and employee twenty -five (25)  people. This proposed ordinance gives no
exception to anyone and Richman Masters asks the Council to remove tobacco stores from the
list of places where smoking is prohibited. If this bill is passed South Bend will have the most
strict smoking ban in the state of Indiana. All other Indiana cities that have adopted anti - smoking
ordinances all expressly exempt retail tobacco stores from the ban. The business of a retail
tobacco store is wholly dependent upon tobacco sales and has no other way to make up profits. 
Restaurants and bars have other principle profits. The courts have said exempting tobacco stores
is reasonable because that is all the store can sell and their very livelihood depends on it. It is
unreasonable for South Bend not to exempt tobacco stores and this ordinance will put tobacco
stores at a disadvantage to other stores in the area. This bill would put the tobacco stores in South
Bend at an unfair disadvantage to the stores outside of the city limits in the County and
Mishawaka. This ordinance regulates the sale of tobacco in a tobacco store and goes beyond the
city' s powers to adopt regulations on restrictions of smoking in public places and if it is enacted
without change would be subject to a legal challenge. 

Scott Carrico, 4202 Technology Dr., Vice - President of Master Distributors and Low Bob' s spoke
against the bill. As Jim mentioned earlier, this company employees 325 families and they depend
upon me to make the right decisions and fight for the rights of the people we take care of. For the
state, local, and federal government they collect over $60 million dollars in tax. We also pay $2. 1
million dollars in payroll tax plus property taxes that benefit South Bend and our warehouse is
here in the city limits. We are asking for the state law to be upheld and the exemption of tobacco
stores remain in place. Our business has been here since 1936 and we do not have to be here. It
would make more sense for us to be in Indianapolis by pure geography but we stay here because
it is our home. A committee should be formed and we need to be a part of that discussion. Mr. 
Carrico stated he is not here to argue for secondhand smoke, he is here to argue for the
employees under his care that will be hurt by this bill. People talk about jobs they can' t get, we
can' t hire enough people for our warehouse that is smoke free. That is a fact. So when they talk
about not being able to get good quality jobs in South Bend, we are actively looking for good
quality people in a smoke free area. This is not fair to our industry and our company. Smokers
are under attack, it is a dirty product, but it is a choice that can be made by an adult and if that is
taken away what is next. Don' t take this choice away from adults. 

Drew Duncan, 439 S.  Michigan St.,  student and store manager of a vape shop in South Bend. 
Life as God' s gift has been mentioned already but free choice is also a gift from God. As an adult
once you reach the age of eighteen ( 18)  you can make choices.  There are plenty of
establishments in South Bend that are nonsmoking. Mr. Duncan requested that the Council sends
this bill to a working committee so that these unanswered questions can be analyzed. There are
still questions about what happened in Elkhart. It needs to be studied what will happen to
businesses in this city not in any other city. Vape shops will have to leave town and that is the
definition of being economically affected. Mr. Duncan claimed a vote in favor of this bill robs
him of the ability to invest in the city of South Bend and it will take his job. When things like
this get passed without being thoroughly vetted they harm people like him. It is easy to be a

11

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

political coward and vote this, but what is really difficult is to stand with the common people and
make a choice and stand in the face of people who wish to oppress your choice takes bravery. 

John Hosinski, 502 W. Washington St.,  stated he came here as someone who has a great love of
this Council and served on this Council in the past. All seven ( 7)  of his children hate that he
smokes and he can remember a time when he used to sit in his office in this building where he
would smoke and it was totally legal, times have changed. Everyone here gets it that smoking is
bad for people, people tell him that all the time and everyone knows it. Those arguments are not
disputed and it' s banned basically everywhere already. Mr. Hosinski asked what big problem are
we trying to fix because the problem no longer exists. We have not really seen any aggrieved
party in this case.  Smoking bans should be everywhere except these few private establishments
left and have a sign on the door saying these are the people who haven' t figured it out yet and
quit. 

Pat Mulligan, 1705 South Bend Ave., this ordinance will murder our businesses. Mr Mulligan
loves this City and this community. Mr. Mulligan stated he moved to this great city of South
Bend because he loves Notre Dame. He cashed in everything he had to start his bar and he is
proud of his business that he has worked eight ( 8)  years to build his customer base both smokers
and non - smokers both blue collar workers and white collar workers and on the door is a sign that
says twenty -one (2 1)  and up. We need to focus on the two (2)  shootings that happened last night
not this issue,  lets protect our police and firefighters. Let' s make this City and community safe, 
we are not bothering anybody. People have a choice to come into my bar, no one is forced. The
casino is coming in and it' s going to have smoking. This bill will kill our businesses.  Things are
starting to go well in this city, we have seen the turnaround, let' s not jeopardize that. We don' t
want vacant buildings in this city.  He implored the Council to think real hard tonight about this
decision because it will murder these bars. 

Warren Diltz, 1454 Garland Circle South Bend IN, stated his family has been doing business in
Northern Indiana and Southern Michigan for over seventy (70)  years.  His family has been
putting video games, juke boxes, pool tables and other bar games in every location that would
allow them to do so and bars are a big part of his business. He was the one that brought the
comparison list of bars from Elkhart. When a bar closes the liquor license does not go away
immediately. Some claimed that the bar closed earlier but bar names do not necessarily
correspond with the corporation name on the license. Mr. Diltz stated his information is not
anecdotal and he is the expert in this area, there are at least seventeen ( 17)  vacant taverns in the
city of Elkhart and none outside the city limits. Yes some businesses have opened but they have
been big corporations that don' t reinvest that money back in the town like these small businesses. 
The fact that you find this information anecdotal is proof that a fact finding study needs to be
undertaken because there is information you don' t have,  don' t understand,  and could learn from
businesses in these areas.  Mr. Diltz stated he would be happy to be a part of a study to answer
some of those questions. 

Don Ruscoski, 5028 Ford St.,  stated he is the finance officer of the American Legion Post 357
and has been on their board for eleven ( 11)  years.  This post has done so much remodeling on this
smoking area, they had to put in special doors that cost over $8, 000 to satisfy smoking
requirements and now if this is passed all of that was for nothing and it' s ridiculous because that
is money thrown right out the window. Our post went non - smoking for one week and lost $3, 861
during that week alone. Gavin Ferlic has never once came to our club or called us and we have
an answering machine. He has not contacted every bar. Right across the street from our post is
another one that is in St. Joseph County and if you pass this it will only take a year or year and a
half until we close because our customers will leave and join that club. Mr. Ruscoski asked if
these councilmembers are going to go to their employees and tell them they are out of a job. Mr. 
Ruscoski asked the Council to not pass this bill. 

Donna Mitchel, 1236 Longfellow South Bend, stated the Council has gone about this in the
wrong way. She has had several people in her family who have died of cancer but her problem is
that these people have businesses and the people who go there do not have a gun to their head
they are adults. The Council is elected to represent us and you should have made a law stating all
bars in the future cannot have smoking in their bars so then the owner could make the choice if
they want to open the business. Then they have other choices but this way these owners have no

12

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

choices. The government does not know what is best for me or for these people. Look at public
education or other public services, nothing comes out like the government promises.  She stated
she does not trust the Council or the government. 

Rick Ruszkowski,  233 S.  Main St., thanked the Council for his opportunity to speak. Mr. 
Ruskowski stated no one here from the bars has heard from Gavin Ferlic in person or on their
answering machine, he has not reached out to any of them. Mr. Ruskowski stated Gavin Ferlic
held a news conference upon the proposal of this ban and issued a statement that the Council has
enough votes to pass this legislation and that third times the charm. At the time of this press
conference no public hearing had happened. Mr. Ruszkowski stated he is not comparing Gavin
Ferlic to the Castros but dictatorship and communism started somewhere.  This legislation is
nothing more than a personal agenda of the few despite the impact it has on the many. The
Councilmembers he spoke with were selected because of their willingness to hear, listen, and
reason to opposition to what might be a strong belief for them not because they may be weak or
persuadable.  This proposed ordinance will not benefit anyone. The argument that it protects
employees or patrons who do not have a choice is a lie. The stereotyping of people in the bar
industry shows Gavin Ferlic' s demeaning mentality. Most of the bartenders at Finnies have a
white collar job during the day and bartend at night to supplement their own dreams and desires. 
The general manager at Finnies chooses to work there and also chooses not to smoke. Why does
Gavin Ferlic and a few others on this Council feel the right to dictate what is right for me and the
public? This Council is attempting to deny freedom to people and is an attack on our right to
choose for ourselves,  freedom of enterprise, and freedom of a privately owned business to make
their own decisions.  To Gavin Ferlic, Mr. Ruskowkski stated he stands with an army behind him
and will stay quiet no more. Mr. Ruskowski claims Gavin Ferlic his attempt to place reigns on
free enterprise and freedom of choice is deplorable and despicable, he has overstepped his
bounds and ignored the oath and mission statement he swore to uphold. This behind the scenes
work will not be forgotten. 

Thomas Plempe Sr., third district commander of the American Legion and oversees the four (4) 
county areas around South Bend, when Post 308 went nonsmoking a few years back they
reversed it after a year because they almost went out of business. 

Jason Nielson, 52936 Highland Dr. 46635 South Bend, stated he owns a vape shop in South
Bend that deal with the liquids and devices. He asked the Councilmembers if anyone of them
learned anything about his business and vaping. He stated vaping has been lumped in with
tobacco and it is not right. Vaping and smoking are not the same thing. He asked if they have
learned anything about vaping, it is not the same thing. 

John Burgraph, 52187 Fur Rd. Granger, stated he owned a bar for twenty -six (26)  years and it
was a smoking bar. He submitted petitions that he stated have eight- hundred signatures online
and he went to twenty -three bars and collected signatures from them as well. Both petitions were
submitted to the City Clerk' s Office. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic spoke in rebuttal to the opposition. He reported that Fort Wayne is
seventy (70)  percent of the population of Allen County, Columbus is fifty -five (55)  percent, 
Franklin is sixteen ( 16)  percent, West Lafayette is sixteen ( 16)  percent, and Zionsville is twenty - 
three ( 23)  percent. This is a broad range of cities with a comprehensive smoking ban with a
number of different percentages of the county population. The CDC study does focus on cities
where the county surrounding the city does not have a ban so the claim that we don' t have data
on a similar situation to South Bend is false. These were cities where the state did not have a ban
just like our case would be. Regarding the changes that Indiana made bars make and spend
money on, that was not the City of South Bend that required any sort of vents or doors, and
Councilmember Ferlic stated his disappointment that Indiana did not take it a step further and
provide comprehensive smoke free air like other states have done.  Councilmember Ferlic stated
he never said the Council majority had made up their mind or that " third times the charm ". The
data is undeniable, secondhand smoke kills. The data is undeniable, that economically the bans
do not have an economic impact. He implored the Council to think about the health of this City
and think about members of their family and community that have suffered from heart disease, 
lung disease and cancer. The economic costs of secondhand smoke to the City of South Bend is

13

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

twenty (20) million dollars per year. Looking beyond costs, if this ordinance is passed the City of
South Bend will see a reduction in lung disease, heart disease and cancer. 

The Councilmembers were given an opportunity to voice their opinion on Bill I I -16. 

Councilmember Karen White stated this is a tough issue and has been for a number of years. 
When it came to the Council in previous years she supported it at that time and she continues to
believe it is a public health issue.  She stated concern about the implementation and she did ask
the sponsors for a longer implementation period and thanked them for doing so.  During that time
a lot can get done working with these businesses and we will always have an opportunity to
come back and have further conversations to tweak or edit the ordinance if it is passed.  She
stated she has met with business owners and managers and will continue to meet with them at
any time but she has been very clear about where she is at on this issue. The Council does not
want us to lose any businesses and that is not her intent, hopefully by everyone working together
strategies can be developed to make sure South Bend does not lose businesses. 

Councilmember John Voorde stated he has tried to listen and understand the concerns of both
sides. Councilmember Voorde was one of the original co- sponsors and also one who thought it
was more realistic to extend the implementation date. He stated he was most persuaded by the
comments made by the head of the local AFL -CIO, that we have a responsibility to ensure that
workers have a healthy workplace. 

Council President Tim Scott stated he echoes what Councilmember White has already said. He
pledged his support to help the bars if this does go forward and help with any type of
development or aid we can lend to them. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated there are without a doubt health issues which have been
documented, but despite the efforts to say otherwise there will be economic consequences. 
Whether it is the relocation of a distribution center from South Bend or the loss of a bar from one
side of the street to another there will be some loss of businesses.  Smoking is legal in this
country and tobacco products are legal, personal property is personal property. He stated he has
no problem with what the city or state wish to do with the property they own but the constant
badgering of government on personal rights issues has got to slow down or be halted. This is an
issue that is difficult for both sides.  Four (4)  years ago we visited this and we adopted a
requirement that all bars that wish to allow smoking place a notice by their entryway and no one
walks in to these bars without knowing they are walking into a smoking bar. Councilmember
Varner stated he believes over the past four (4)  years with employment the way it is that no one
has recently been employed in a bar that does not know it is a smoking bar. People are not
dragged into these establishments or forced to take a job. If it was my office or my home there is
no smoking but this is a personal property issue as much as a health issue and it weighs more
heavily on the personal property side of the argument. Yes there will be some people who die
from secondhand smoke but they made the choice themselves and are adults. It is not the job of
the Council to legislate on behalf of every citizen everything that will be best for them. He
suggested the ordinance that is already in affect remain in affect. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden thanked everyone for coming out tonight especially the
individuals she has had the opportunity to talk to this past month regarding this issue. There is
decades of health data to show the negative outcomes of secondhand smoke. Balancing the
individual rights of the bar owners and the right of workers and patrons is tricky and where she is
having the most trouble. This ordinance would give almost a year to get this right as a
community and would involve people on both sides coming together for the better of South
Bend. It would mean as partners in city government working with these local business to prevent
any detrimental effects to business in South Bend. No one on this Council takes that concern
lightly and has been working to balance good health and make this transition in South Bend. 
Councilmember Broden stated she is looking for partnerships on this and middle ground to work
with people because that is what South Bend does best. We work hard but we also work together. 
She stated she is confident in making this tough decision because she believes these two interests
can partner and work together for the better of everyone. Yes it can be tough and yes people can
walk away from these businesses and go to Mishawaka or the County. This is about establishing
safe working environments across the board and she is not interested in carving out special

14

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

exemptions where we say some workers should not be protected. She stated she is interested in
trying to push this initiative county wide in addition to her vote tonight. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly stated as a co- sponsor of the bill everyone knows where he stands. 
This is primarily a public health issue and he agrees with Councilmember Voorde that this is
about workplace safety. He stated he does appreciate Councilmember Dr. Varner' s statement
about personal choice. What has not been discussed much this evening is that we already
subsidize smokers through increased insurance premiums,  Medicare and Medicaid taxes,  and
higher medical costs.  Those costs come with living in a free society and we already pay the taxes
and he is willing to do that even though he is not a smoker. Councilmember Kelly stated his
father was diagnosed with lung cancer more than twenty (20) years after he had quit smoking
and that was before work place bans had been put in place. He was one of the lucky ones and
lived more than five (5)  years but then subsequently had heart disease which was attributable to
secondhand smoke. We as a society are paying for smokers and their increased healthcare
already but that again is the cost of a free society. There does need to be a line drawn and that
line should be drawn in public places. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston stated she has learned a lot and thanked everyone for
their comments.  She has spent a fair amount of time talking to her peers on the Council and also
the public about this issue because it is her first time with this conversation.  There is still more to
learn and a big concern is enforcement. The City should not make a rule or law that it cannot be
consistent with regarding enforcement. The Police Dept. and Code Enforcement have so many
more issues that are more pressing than somebody in their private space smoking. There has to
be better ways to promote public health.  South Bend has to become a more healthy community
but forcing people not to smoke in spaces that are their own is not the way to do it. 
Councilmember Wiliams- Preston stated she has been surprised by talking with people in her
district that did not even know this conversation was going on or what they thought about and as
elected officials we need to do a better job at figuring out what the people who elected us want. 
We should be talking about fifty -six (56)  percent of people who live in Portage Township live at
or below the poverty line and that is important because our smoking rate would be much lower if
that percentage of people in poverty were lower. Those young people are stressed and that drives
people to smoking more than anything else and we solve that with education and jobs. There is a
better way to address the health issue than just saying people cannot smoke. Even though this has
been talked about for a while things change, we may have a casino coming and vaping is still a
very new thing. She stated she wants to learn more about Elkhart because that is important what
happened next door. On the issue of exemptions many cities give exemptions that have been held
up in court so why did we not include those exemptions. Yes it is important to bring these two
sides together as Councilmember Broden brought up but we need to do that before we pass an
ordinance not after and if that takes a year then so be it. 

Council Vice President Oliver Davis stated he is happy about the decision the Council made four
4)  years ago when we passed a more restrictive non - smoking law than the state had in place and
that should have been the end of this issue.  His concern is that even after this the issue will come
back again. It is a misnomer to say we have not already voted more strict measures than the state
mandates. This would be a completely different issue if we were going to try to outlaw alcohol
even though alcohol is a big health issue.  If we want to talk about health issues why do we not
address how people eat in this city. Even though those things are bad we are not going to outlaw
them. Regarding Marion County, Indianapolis law covers ninety -two (92)  percent which means
those bars only have to compete against eight ( 8)  percent of the county. Fort Wayne bars only
have to compete against thirty (30)  percent of their county. If this Council passes this law, South
Bend bars will have to compete against sixty (60)  percent of the St. Joseph County. That is a
huge difference from Indianapolis and Fort Wayne and I want to talk about Indiana not the rest
of the country or the world. We keep talking about this new South Bend and all the new young
people coming here but what about the people who have always been here. This law is just going
to run those people out of town. With all due respect to Smoke Free St. Joe, their name
specifically says St. Joseph County. The County has the health department go talk to them and
ask them to institute this change because I don' t see your group talking to them. And where most
of you have jobs and getting your money from is a hospital that left South Bend and moved to
Mishawaka. Councilmember Oliver Davis stated he was concerned Smoke Free St.  Joe has not

15

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

worked with any bars going smoke free and if they have had any success in the past. He stated
there is new information and education is an ongoing process.  The last two (2)  times the Council
never once talked about vaping and the casino was not an issue so there are new things to talk
about regardless of what the editorial board at the South Bend Tribune wants to say. 
Councilmember Davis also questioned the ability for some bars to place their patios fifteen ( 15) 
feet from the door because many bars do not have that much space.  He also raised concerns
about people having to leave their drinks in the bar when they go smoke and then people putting
drugs in those drinks and also raised concerns about the severability clause. Councilmember
Davis asked what if this was the president of Notre Dame in the red shirts asking for a study
committee or the president of the Chamber of Commerce. What if it was not Mr. Mulligan but
someone who owns 1St Source Bank then would be more receptive to listen. When Elbel came
out and were mad about that the Council did not rush to judgment about that issue. It has taken
eleven ( 11)  years to try to figure out where Dr. Martin Luther King St.  should be. So if we can
put together a committee for Elbel and Dr. King we should be able to put together a committee to
look into this smoking ban. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston made a motion to form a special committee on this
issue and send Bill 11 - 16 to that committee. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the
motion. The motion was defeated by a roll call vote of four (4)  ayes ( Council Vice President
Oliver Davis, Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston, Councilmember Dr. David Varner, and
Councilmember Karen White) and five (5)  nays. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to send Bill 11 - 16 to the full Council with a
favorable recommendation. Councilmember Randy Kelly seconded the motion which carried by
a roll call vote of six (6)  ayes and three ( 3)  nays ( Council Vice President Oliver Davis, 
Councilmember Dr. David Varner, Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston). 

RISE AND REPORT

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to rise and report to full Council.  Councilmember
Oliver Davis seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of nine (9)  ayes. 

REGULAR MEETING RECONVENED

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend reconvened in the
Council Chambers on the fourth floor of the County -City building at 10: 22 p.m. Council
President Tim Scott presided with nine ( 9)  members present

BILLS — THIRD READING

11 - 16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE SOUTH BEND COMMON COUNCIL
AMENDING CHAPTER 14 OF THE SOUTH
BEND MUNICIPAL CODE BY ESTABLISHING
NEW ARTICLE 13 ENTITLED SMOKE FREE
AIR REGULATIONS FOR WORKPLACES AND
PUBLIC PLACES

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to defeat Bill 11 - 16.  Councilmember Regina
Williams- Preston seconded the motion which was defeated by a roll call vote of three (3)  ayes
Councilmember Oliver Davis, Councilmember Regina Williams Preston, and Councilmember
Dr. David Varner) and six (6)  nays. 

Council Attorney Kathleen Cekanski- Farrand stated there needs to be a motion to amend as was
in the Committee of the Whole. So moved by Councilmember Gavin Ferlic and seconded by
Councilmember Randy Kelly, the motion carried by a roll call vote of six (6) ayes and three (3) 

16

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

nays. ( Councilmember Oliver Davis, Councilmember Dr. David Varner and Councilmember
Regina Williams- Preston). 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to pass Bill 11 - 16.  Councilmember Randy Kelly
seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of six (6)  ayes and three ( 3)  nays
Councilmember Oliver Davis,  Councilmember Dr. David Varner, Councilmember Regina
Williams- Preston). 

Councilmember Oliver Davis left the meeting at 10: 26 p.m. 

Council President Tim Scott asked people to please be respectful and quiet as there were two (2) 
resolutions left for the Council to consider and two ( 2)  bills for first reading. 

RESOLUTIONS

16 -30

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL

OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

CORRECTING SCRIVENER' S ERROR IN

RESOLUTION NO. 4537- 16 APPROVING THE

DESIGNATION OF CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN

THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, 

COMMONLY KNOWN AS:  211 WEST

WASHINGTON STREET AS AN ECONOMIC

REVITALIZATION AREA FOR PURPOSES OF

A TEN ( 10)  YEAR REAL PROPERTY TAX

ABATEMENT FOR: RETAIL PROPERTY

LOCATED AT THE TOWER AT WASHINGTON

SQUARE LLC

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic reported that the Community Investment Committee met and sends
this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Brian Pawlowski, Offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City Building, served as the presenter
for this bill. This is a minor adjustment to the tax identification number on Resolution No. 4537- 
16 due to a scrivener' s error. 

Mark Neal, Offices at 112 West Jefferson South Bend, served as the petitioner for this bill. This
is just fixing an error in the retail property tax identification number for the property. 

There were no questions from the Council and no one from the public spoke in favor or in
opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -30.  Councilmember Karen White
seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

16 -31

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND

DESIGNATING CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE

CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 
COMMONLY KNOWN AS INTERSECTION OF

MAYFLOWER RD AND WESTERN AVENUE

SOUTH BEND, IN 46619 AS AN ECONOMIC

REVITALIZATION AREA FOR PURPOSES OF

A SIX (6)  YEAR REAL PROPERTY TAX

ABATEMENT FOR COUNTY DEVELOPMENT, 

LLC

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic reported that the Community Investment Committee met and sends
this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

17

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

Brian Pawlowski, Offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City Building, served as the presenter
for this bill. Highlighted that this will be a new construction with about $ 6. 8 million dollars in
investment and a total square footage of 40,000 square feet. The estimated total taxes on the new
building construction are $ 1. 18 million, the estimated taxes to be abated are $ 464, 000 and the
estimated taxes to be paid during the six (6)  year abatement are $ 715, 00.00. This will add an
additional thirteen ( 13)  employees which excludes the current thirty (3 0)  employees at their
existing store and will add approximately 450,000. 00 in payroll. 

Rob Bartles, 760 Cotter St.  South Bend 46613,  served as the petitioner for this bill. They are
very excited about this project and all the time and talent that has gone into it. This abatement
would help them with the costs and will help bring a beautiful store to the Westside and a store
they deserve out there. 

There were no questions from Council and no one from the public spoke in favor or in
opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -31.  Councilmember Dr. David
Varner seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

BILLS FIRST READING

18 -16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH
BEND,  INDIANA, AMENDING CHAPTER 2, 
ARTICLE 1 OF THE SOUTH BEND
MUNICIPAL CODE BY DELETING SECTIONS
2 -9. 1 ADDRESSING POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES GOVERNING CITY -OWNED
TECHNOLOGIES, FACEBOOK STANDARDS, 
SOCIAL MEDIA AND SOCIAL NETWORKING
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

This bill was given first reading. Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill 18 -16
to the Information and Technology Committee and set public hearing for April 11 to
Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8) 

ayes. 

19 -16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH
BEND, INDIANA, TO ADDRESS BUSKERS
AND SIDEWALK PERFORMERS BY
REPEALING CHAPTER 4, ARTICLE 4, 
SECTION 4 -21 OF THE SOUTH BEND
MUNICIPAL CODE, RE- CODIFYING AND
AMENDING IT WITHIN A NEW ARTICLE 13
OF CHAPTER 14,  NEW SECTIONS 14 -123
THROUGH 14 -126 OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE, 
AND FURTHER AMENDING CHAPTER 13, 
ARTICLE 12,  SECTION 13 -26 CONCERNING

SOLICITATIONS

This bill was given first reading. Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill 19 -16
to the Health and Public Safety Committee and set public hearing for April 11th. Councilmember
Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

18

REGULAR MEETING

MARCH 29,  2016

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

There was no unfinished business. 

NEW BUSINESS

There was no new business. 

PRIVILEGE OF THE FLOOR

Gary King, 730 N. Hill Street South Bend, stated with no disrespect to the people who designed
the new flag or to the selection committee but the current design does not adhere to the
guidelines set out by the Council in their flag resolution. The flag includes a red star with six (6) 
points, supposedly to represent the six (6)  council districts, which was a guideline not established
by the Council. This star also mimics the star on Chicago' s flag and South Bend should not try to
mimic Chicago we should be our own city. 

Jason Banicki Critchlow, 3822 W. Ford St.  South Bend,  stated he enjoyed seeing so many people
come out today and wishes they came out like that more often because the more voices that come
out can only strengthen our democracy. He wanted to point out that there were two (2)  shootings
last night and the additional $25, 000 is not enough to the police to stem that tide. Yes the
economy is improving but we need to do more to thoroughly analyze how our police can keep us
safe and make a dent in the rising crime. 

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business to come before the Council, President Tim Scott adjourned the
meeting at 10:40 p.m. 

19

