r CD

o

o

t7l

0

CD

CD

y

tz

d
z

b

o

r

m

Cri

Cri

t 

rrJ

tri

t 

r 

t 

uj
v, 

t 

Cr1

tli

t=i

t 

O

O

N

n

n

0

0

CA
CA
O
O
H
H
x
x

z
z

d
d

a

a

i
i

a

a

y

y

N

N

N
N
O_ 
O_ 

d1

d1

z

z

y
y

O

r
r

O

r
r

r
x

r
x

y

y

a

a

z
y

z
y

rn

CD

K

vc
0

td

N
W

a, 
O

N
w

7
C
7
a
7
C
7
a
REPORT OF SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

TO THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND: 

THE SUB - COMMITTEE HAS INSPECTED THE MINUTES OF THE

April 25, 2016

MEETING OF THE COUNCIL AND FOUND THEM TO BE CORRECT. 

THEREFORE, WE RECOMMEND THE SAME BE APPROVED: 

TIM SCOTT

Wi11 1 • ' 

APPROVED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL ON: 

May 9,  2016

ATTEST: 

EMAH FOWLER, CITY CLERK

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend, Indiana met in the
Council Chambers of the County -City Building on Monday, April 25th 2016 at 7: 00 p.m. The
meeting was called to order by Council Vice President Oliver Davis and the Invocation was
given by Rabbi Michael Friedland from Sinai Synagogue and Pledge to the Flag was given. 

ROLL CALL

COUNCIL MEMBERS: 

PRF.gF.NT- 

Regina Williams- Preston
Randy Kelly
Josephine Broden
Dr. David Varner
Oliver J.  Davis
John Voorde

Gavin Ferlic
Karen L. White

ABSENT: 

2nd District

3rd District
4th District

5th District
6th District, Vice President
At -Large
At- Large, Chairperson Committee of the Whole
At -Large

Tim Scott

1 st District, President

OTHERS PRESENT: 

Kathleen Cekanski- Farrand
Adriana Rodriguez

Kareemah Fowler
Jennifer Coffinan

Alkeyna Aldridge
Joseph Molnar

Council Attorney
Legal Research Assistant
City Clerk
Chief Deputy Clerk
Deputy Clerk
Clerk Executive Assistant

REPORT FROM THE SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

Councilmember Karen White made a motion that the minutes of the April 1 I1 2016 meeting of
the Council be accepted and placed on file. Councilmember Randy Kelly seconded the motion
which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

SPECIAL BUSINESS

Council Vice President Oliver David recognized Boy Scout Troop 572 for attending the meeting
of the Common Council. 

REPORTS OF CITY OFFICES

Representing the city administration will be John Murphy. 

RESOLVE INTO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

At 7: 06 p.m. Councilmember Karen White made a motion to resolve into the Committee of the
Whole. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of
eight ( 8)  ayes.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chairperson, presiding. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic explained the procedures to be followed for tonight' s meeting in
accordance with Article 1,  Section 2 -11 of the South Bend Municipal Code. 

PUBLIC HEARINGS

09 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE

COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA, ANNEXING TO AND BRINGING WITHIN

THE CITY LIMITS OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, AND

AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR

PROPERTY LOCATED IN PORTAGE TOWNSHIP, 

CONTIGUOUS THEREWITH; COUNCILMANIC

DISTRICT NO. 6,  FOR 22027 STATE ROAD 23,  SOUTH

BEND,  INDIANA

Council Vice President Oliver Davis reported that the Zoning &  Annexation Committee met and
sends this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Matthew Chappuies, Area Plan Commission with offices on the 1 lth Floor of the County -City
Building, served as the presenter for this bill. This is a petition to rezone and annex the Cataldo
property to a CB ( Community Business District) into the City of South Bend. The property is
surrounded by agricultural fields to the north and west. To the east are Light Industrial
complexes. Mr. Chappuies provided a proposed site plan of what the plot may look like in the
future, the site plan is on file in the City Clerk' s Office. The Area Plan Commission sends Bill
09 -16 to the Council with a favorable recommendation. 

Brian McMorrow, 750 Lincolnway East,  served as the petitioner for this bill. Their firm was
retained by the Cataldo' s last year in response to a letter from the City that the sewers may be
extended onto their land. Also, in light of some of the business activity planned in that area the
Cataldo' s wanted to have the opportunity to act on any possible business in the future. 

Council Vice President Oliver Davis asked Mr. McMorrow if the pizzeria would be closing. 

Mr. McMorrow responded there are no plans to close the pizzeria. 

No one from the public spoke in favor or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to send Bill 09 -16 to the full Council with a
favorable recommendation and have third reading on May 9th 2016.  Councilmember Karen
White seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

13 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY
LOCATED AT 424, 426 &  430 CUSHING STREET AND
726 &  736 LINCOLN WAY WEST, COUNCILMANIC
DISTRICT NO.  1 IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA

Council Vice President Oliver Davis reported that the Zoning &  Annexation Committee met and
sends this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Matthew Chappuies, Area Plan Commission with offices on the 1 lth Floor of the County -City
Building, served as the present for this bill. The site is currently several commercial and
residential parcels divided by a recently vacated alley. To the north of the property is the TCU
Bank and to the east is the Tuxedo Shop.  Mr. Chappuies provided a site map and pictures of the

2

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

area which are now on file in the City Clerk' s Office. The proposed site plan identifies an 8, 200
square foot retail store with access from both Lincolnway and Cushing. There will be a
substantial amount of landscaping on all four (4)  sides of the property. The petitioner has work
with both the Area Plan Commission and Community Investment throughout the process to
ensure good site design and quality development. The Area Plan Commission sends Bill 13 -16 to
the full Council with a favorable recommendation. 

Jordan Liss,  19 South Lasalle Chicago Illinois, served as the petitioner for this bill. They are
looking to redevelop this property for a Family Dollar store. When this plan was conceived it
was originally a more vehicle friendly design with parking in the front, but after discussions with
the Area Plan Commission they determined it would be better to rezone the property in order to
comply with the West Side Main Streets plan for more of a pedestrian orientated usage. 

Councilmember Karen White asked if anyone from the public spoke at their meeting on this bill. 

Mr. Chappuies responded the only person who spoke was the representative from the
Department of Community Investment, no one from the public spoke at the meeting. 

Councilmember Karen White asked about the proposed parking. 

Mr. Chappuies responded the parking is on the side of the street in compliance with the Mixed
Use District which requires the building be placed no further than twenty (20)  feet from the lot
line to develop a more walkable urban development. They still do meet the required parking
spaces for this proposed building. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston asked if this is the same business venture that owns
the Family Dollar just twelve ( 12)  blocks up the street. 

Mr. Liss responded all the Family Dollar stores are corporately operated, owned and leased to
Family Dollar by third party private owners. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston expressed concern about the many Family Dollar facilities
across the city that seem to be poorly maintained on the inside and out. She stated the plan may
look pretty now but what if the facility is not kept up in the future. 

Mr. Liss responded he understands the concern and will speak with the operations to keep the
store in line and recommends the best course of action really is to fine the store if they are not
keeping up the property. 

No one from the public spoke in favor or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill 13 - 16 to the full Council with a
favorable recommendation. Councilmember Jo M. Broden seconded the motion which carried by
a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

07 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 
INDIANA, AMENDING CHAPTER 1 OF THE SOUTH
BEND MUNICIPAL CODE BY THE INCLUSION OF
NEW SECTION 1 - 5. 1 ENTITLED CITY FLAG

Council Vice President Oliver Davis served as the Chair of the Committee of the Whole during
the public hearing of Bill 07 -16. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to accept Substitute Bill 07 -16.  Councilmember
John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston reported the Community Relations Committee met
and sends this bill to the full Council with a favorable recommendation. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic was the presenter for this bill. He thanked all the people who came
out to support the new city flag and also the SB150 and Committee that put together this
inclusive and comprehensive process.  This is an open source design that can be used and

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

interpreted by anyone for free and for any purpose. The Council passed a resolution that set the
frame work for this process and the final step is to bring it to the Council for final approval. They
filed a bill almost two ( 2)  months ago and since it has been a while since it got a hearing the
public has really run with this design such as T- Shirts, Flags and some other great community
response. 

Aaron Perri, Director of SB150 217 S.  Michigan, served as the petitioner for this bill. Mr. Perri
expressed the honor it was to be a part of this process and chair the yearlong celebration. Last
fall a committee was formed to discover what it would take to introduce a new flag. A public
meeting was held to get people' s ideas and then the contest was developed which produced over
two - hundred (200)  designs from the community. This ad -hoc committee,  of which Council
President Tim Scott was a member, met and was composed of professional marketers,  graphic
designers and other folks from the public to evaluate the two - hundred ( 200)  designs. They
narrowed it down to around twelve ( 12)  designs and met with those designers to learn more
about the themes involved in the individual flags. Ultimately three ( 3)  final designs were
unveiled to the public and the public gave their comments and provided feedback online or in
person. There were elements of all three ( 3)  that the public liked and no clear winner, so designs
from all three ( 3)  of the final flags were incorporated into this flag. Mr. Perri invited Garret
Gingerich, the final designer of the flag, to explain the elements of the new flag. 

Mr. Gingerich stated as with any creative project the result is going to be subjective but the
North American Vexillological Association has a guide of best practices anyone creating a flag
can follow. The first guide is to keep the flag simple, a child should be able to recognize the flag
at a distance and be able to draw the design. It should also be reversible so no matter which way
it flies it is recognizable. There should be two (2)  to three ( 3)  basic colors, nothing too
extravagant. They recommend no lettering or seals on the flag. Words defeat the purpose of a
good flag or sign. You cannot read words from a distance and it is also hard to replicate them
when they are scaled down. Most importantly the flag should have meaningful symbolism. 

The six - pointed star represents the six (6)  districts of the Council and the diverse heritage of the. 
people who make up each of those districts. The red color is symbolic for the passion and energy
behind the City. The river is represented very literally, which the public in the feedback portion
wanted to see,  in the center of the flag. This makes the flag very unique. The city is represented
flowing through the City in the white stripe, this color is associated with the color of peace and
also taken from the City Seal. The second thin blue stripe serves as a bridge,to the future to keep
the City moving. The yellow dominant color represents the City' s generosity and the warm
accepting nature of South Bend and was taken from the current city flag. 

Mr. Perri stated when this ordinance was filed the design became public domain and we are
starting to see it in the usual places such as on bumper stickers and lapels. Mr. Perri stated he has
been most excited about seeing the public really adopt the flag as their own, flying outside of
businesses,  at Four Winds Field, t -shirts are starting to be produced and so on. These are really
purposes that the old city flag was not a good vehicle for because it was not as adaptable. People
are putting it as the background of their Facebook pages and the Human Rights Commission
used it to advertise an upcoming event. There is a bicycling team that has put the flag on the back
of their jerseys and the South Bend Lacrosse team has put it on the back of their jerseys as well: 
Mr. Perri invited the lacrosse team, who were in attendance, to stand up to show their jerseys. At
so many locations and areas the community has really used this flag to show their pride in South
Bend. People are really starting to identify this design and this flag with South Bend. Mr. Perri
thanked the Council for supporting the resolution last fall which outlined the selection process
and appreciated their support going forward. 

There were no questions from the Council at this time. 

Those wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Chad Crabtree, 2135 East Dash Maple Lane Elkhart IN, spoke in favor of the bill as a member of
the North American Vexillological Association. He consulted on this project and has done so for
other municipalities and organizations as well. This flag clearly meets all the guidelines for a
very successful flag as can be seen by all the merchandise and creative adaptations the
community is already developing. 

4

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

Carter Chambers,  52055 Oak Past Granger IN, spoke in favor of the bill. He stated he is on the
South Bend Lacrosse team and the flag and star represents to him passion, energy and
determination. This gives the South Bend School Corporation elementary and middle school kids
a chance to play under a great symbol. 

Willow Wetheral,  1741 Wall St.,  spoke in favor of the bill. She was part of the public process to
give input on the flag. She thinks the process was handled very well even though whenever you
are doing something with so many different opinions it is going to be difficult. It really is a great
design and is already doing what it was intended to do by being adapted by the community so
quickly. Ms. Wetheral expressed she loves wearing her shirt (which was inspired by the flag
design)  around the City. She stated people love the shirt and ask her where they can purchase one
and at the St. Patrick' s parade she handed out many flags because children especially were so
enthusiastic about the design. Ms. Wetheral presented several names of people who could not be
at the meeting but expressed support of the flag. This design is clearly working and she hoped
that it is passed unanimously tonight. 

Johnathan Anderstrom, 526 W. Western Ave, spoke in favor of the bill. This flag meets all the
criteria that you would want in a city flag. It has distinct characteristics and a unique design as
well as projecting the heritage, solidarity, innovation and consecutiveness of our great City. Mr. 
Anderstrom expressed that flags are incredibly powerful symbols that can offer hope and rally
groups of people together of varying backgrounds and heritages. We are seeing these positive
attributes of a flag with what the community is already doing. 

Lisa Gallagher, 54384 Ivy Rd., spoke in favor of the flag. She stated her favorite part of the flag
is that the community was involved in the entire process. To have a city that solicits input from
the community members is inspiring and she really likes the design. 

Chuck Bueder,  15893 Ashville Lane Granger IN, spoke in favor of the flag. He stated flags
express symbols that represent our greatest ideals and the symbol of a star is perfect to do so.  Mr. 
Bueder asked the Council to also remember to protect the real stars through good outdoor
lighting practices. 

Those wishing to speak in opposition of the bill: 

Marguerite Taylor, 714 E. Corby Blvd., spoke against the bill and represented the North East
Neighborhood Council. She stated the flag is great and she was one of the people who voted
online however; at their meeting they had a very long conversation about the history of the six - 
pointed star and its symbolism to the Jewish Community. Ms. Taylor read a letter from the
President of the North East Neighborhood Council which requested the Council reject the flag
design with the six - pointed star. Ms. Taylor submitted the letter which is on record in the City
Clerk' s Office. 

Gary King, 730 N. Hill St., spoke against the bill. Mr. King referenced the classic story " The
Emperor' s New Clothes"  and how he is the only person who can see what is really going on. 
Unfortunately we have all these people who think this is a great flag and are really getting
involved with spreading the flag but last November the Council passed a resolution that had
criteria for the flag including symbols of connectivity, ethnic heritage and innovation. Mr. King
believes this design does not meet the criteria that the Council set forth and the Council should
vote no. The six - pointed star, representing the six (6)  Council districts, is nowhere referenced in
the resolution. The process was flawed because instead of displaying all the flags they narrowed
it down to only three ( 3)  that had essentially the same design and all had the six (6)  pointed star. 
The Chicago Flag is the only flag in the United States that has that red star and every time we
look at that flag we will think of Chicago and not South Bend. Mr. King presented his idea to
replace the star with the torch of Indiana. 

Charles Smith, 2023 S.  Taylor, thanked the little kid for coming and speaking. He stated he is not
for the flag or against the flag but the City should have had a more inclusive process in picking
the flag. 

Ann Puzello,  1247 E. Lasalle, stated as a private citizen she can change her mind about her
opinions and this is an instance where that happened. She stated she has spoken to people since
the Committee meeting, including the Invocator for tonight, and learned that the Star of David is

5

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

such a different design it would never be mistaken for this star on the proposed flag. She still
expressed hope that the star not represent six (6)  Council districts but rather represent something
else someone could come up with and it should be easy to come up with the six (6)  things South
Bend excels at. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic gave the rebuttal. He expressed the design of the star is to
symbolize a number of different things among them ethnic diversity and unity. He understands
not everyone thinks the flag is perfect and that is just part of the process when doing something
like this with so many different voices being heard.  What is inspiring is the way the community
has responded to this design and this process. 

Councilmember Karen White thanked everyone for their participation as she knows it has been a
long process.  She wished before the flag had been publicly shared the Council could have had a
different type of discussion but she is excited to see how well the public has embraced the flag. It
speaks to a lot of energy and passion in this community and the star represents different things to
different individuals.  She stated she supports the flag but it was unfortunate that they had to
delay the discussion. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic thanked everyone for coming out to support the flag and this great

process. 

Councilmember John Voorde stated he too is in support of the process and the flag. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner thanked everyone who was involved as well. He stated he
agrees not everyone will agree with the design and he has a personal objection to the use of the
six - pointed star. If the best the city can do is a six - pointed star representing the six (6)  Council
districts then the City really missed on symbolism desperately. He stated he does not meant to be
critical but if this is going to be a flag imbued with symbolism then the red star is woefully short. 
He stated he would like to see it rethought a bit but he has been impressed by the reaction it has
had so far. He does not plan on supporting it but not because he does not appreciate everyone' s
efforts. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden asked if it is possible to amend the existing resolution before the
Council to get at the ideas put forth tonight in terms of rethinking the symbol behind the six
districts. Maybe we could get at a different symbolism for the same symbol.  She stated she does
not know where the idea for six (6)  districts comes from but there has to be a better idea. 

Council Attorney Kathleen Cekanski - Farrand responded any bill can be amended on the floor
with specific language. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden stated she is just thinking of posterity and if it goes into the City
Code with that language then it is final about what the star means. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic stated it is very important to adopt the design, people are not
necessarily going to read the City Code as we heard from a number of people today about what
the star means to them. He stated he does welcome the opportunity to continue discussions after
passage about more language regarding what the star means. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston asked if they could change more than just the language
and change the design itself at this meeting. 

Council Attorney Cekanski - Farrand stated as with everything in a bill, anything in the proposed
ordinance is subject to amendment. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden asked if the sponsors of the bill would be supportive of an
amendment and further conversation about what the symbolism of the star means. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic stated continuing the discussion is fine but it is important to pass
the design. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly echoed everyone' s comments who spoke about what a wonderful
process this was, the reaction and involvement of the City was remarkable. He stated he
appreciated Ms. Puzello coming and her comments. Art is open to interpretation and he does not
think we need to say what anything represents as that young man came and said the star

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

represents passion and fire but that is not written anywhere. It is a great design and that is shown
by the community really embracing the flag and used in so many different ways. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston asked the petitioners if they would be okay with
changing the design of the star. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic stated he is in favor of keeping the star as the community has really
rallied around it but as with every ordinance anything can be changed. He wishes to keep the
design as it has been embraced by the community. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated she is excited to see how a certain group of the
community has embraced this. It is a beautiful design especially when it is placed on different
avenues of drt. She stated she does have reservations because of possible concerns by the Jewish
Community. Enough people have expressed concerns regarding the star that the Council should
take notice. Perhaps there is a way to design the flag to be more reflective of our cultural heritage
and diversity. This process has been a good process as there were a lot ofplaces where people
could give input but where our City has struggled in communicating that information out to
everyone. 

Council Vice President stated South Bend used to be the money engine of Indiana. He stated
when he thinks of a star he thinks of the Dallas Cowboys. There are twenty -three ( 23)  other cities
in the State of Indiana that have six ( 6)  Council districts, having that star does not make us
unique. There are many things in South Bend that are wonderful and have no representation in
this flag, we gave a recommendation about what this flag should be and this flag does not meet
those criteria. There is no real history on this flag. Council Vice President Davis also expressed
concern that we started everything with 1865 for the SB150 because that leaves out the City
Cemetery that started in 1831.  Our true sources of our history were between 1831 and 1865,  if
you eliminate those years you eliminate the history of this City. People should be able to go to
our City Cemetery and match it with the flag and they should be equal.  You should be able to go
to the historical spots in South Bend and find them in the flag, this flag does not match up with
our historical spots. Council Vice President stated this flag does not match with the Pokagons, 
Studebaker, Colfax, or the fact we are a college town. He stated he does not want to match up
with Chicago. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden made a motion to strike the language " the six points of the star

represent the six Council districts while"  from the bill. Councilmember John Voorde seconded
the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to send substitute Bill 07 -16 to the full Council as
amended with a favorable recommendation.  Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion
which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

RISE AND REPORT

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to rise and report to full Council. Councilmember
Regina Williams- Preston seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

REGULAR MEETING RECONVENED

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend reconvened in the
Council Chambers on the fourth floor of the County -City building at 8: 18 p.m. Council President
Tim Scott presided with eight ( 8)  members present

BILLS — THIRD READING

07 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE

COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 
INDIANA, AMENDING CHAPTER 1 OF THE SOUTH

7

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

BEND MUNICIPAL CODE BY THE INCLUSION OF
NEW SECTION 1 - 5. 1 ENTITLED CITY FLAG

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to amend Bill 07 -16 as it was in the Committee of
the. Whole. Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of
eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Felric made a motion to pass Substitute Bill 07 -16.  Councilmember
Randy Kelly seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

13 - 16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY
LOCATED AT 424, 426 &  430 CUSHING STREET AND
726 &  736 LINCOLN WAY WEST, COUNCILMANIC
DISTRICT NO.  1 IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to pass Bill 13 - 16.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic
seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

RESOLUTIONS

15 -106

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND DESIGNATING
CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH
BEND, INDIANA, COMMONLY KNOWN AS 1915
BENDIX DRIVE, SOUTH BEND, IN 46628 AN
ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA FOR
PURPOSES OF A (2)  TWO -YEAR VACANT BUILDING
TAX ABATEMENT FOR APPLETREE ASSOCIATES, 

LP

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to continue Bill 15 -106 to May 9th 2016. 
Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 
ayes. 

16 -35

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, APPROVING
A PROPERTY TAX RE- ASSESSMENT INTERLOCAL
AGREEMENT

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to hear substitute Bill 16 -35.  Councilmember Karen
White seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Karen White reported that the Personnel and Finance Committee met and sends
substitute Bill 16 -35 to the full Council with a favorable recommendation. 

John Murphy, City Controller with offices on the 12th Floor of the County -City Building, served
as the presenter for this bill. For a couple of months, City officials from South Bend and
Mishawaka have met with St. Joseph County officials in a joint effort to share resources and
coordinate efforts in respect to certain tax appeals.  This is the " dark store issue"  that has been
talked about recently on the news. The County Council and the City of Mishawaka have already
passed this interlocal agreement. This is not an additional appropriation and they are hoping to
work some of these costs into the regular budget but it is possible during the quarterly budget
reviews an additional appropriation will be requested. In the agreement there is a reporting
requirement that the County Auditor should give us updates on the status of the appeals and the
cost incurred and that information will be forwarded to the Council. 

0

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

There were no questions from the Council. 

No one spoke either in favor or in opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Substitute Bill 16 -35.  Councilmember
Karen White seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

16 -36

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY
OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, ADOPTING A WRITTEN
FISCAL PLAN AND ESTABLISHING A POLICY FOR THE
PROVISION OF SERVICES TO AN ANNEXATION AREA IN
PORTAGE TOWNSHIP ( CATALDO ANNEXATION AREA) 

Council Vice President Oliver Davis reported that the Zoning and Annexation Committee met
and sends this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Michael Divita, Community Investment with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City
Building, served as the presenter for this bill. This fiscal plan is for a 12. 8 acre voluntary
annexation area.  This site is proposed to be redeveloped for commercial uses.  No capital
improvements are planned by the City on part of this annexation, sewer and water are both
available to the northeast along Prairie Ave. Extension of the project site would be done at the
petitioners expense.  The portion of State Road 23 to be annexed will still be maintained by the
Indiana Department of Transportation. The area will be added to the Common Council Sixth
District, served by Police Beat twenty -five (25),  Fire Station Five ( 5)  located on Prairie Ave., 
Emergency Medic Two (2)  and Code Enforcement Area Six (6).  These and other non - capital
services will be in place within one ( 1)  year of the effective date of the annexation with response

times comparable to other areas of the city. 

There were no questions from the Council. 

No one from the public spoke either in favor or in opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion adopt Bill 16 -36.  Councilmember Karen White
seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic served as Chair of the Common Council meeting for the hearing on
Bill 16 -37

16 -37

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY
OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA IN SUPPORT OF
REDISTRICTING REFORM FOR INDIANA

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston reported that the Community Relations Committee
met and sends this bill to the full Council with a favorable recommendation. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis,  1801 Nash St.  South Bend,  served as the petitioner of this bill. 
This is to request that the Council supports a resolution establishing an interim committee on
redistricting to be comprised of legislators and private citizens to study the redistricting process. 
Councilmember Davis introduced representatives from the League of Women Voters who have
spearheaded this bill. 

Gerri Pawelski,  16402 Berry Knoll Way Granger IN, spoke in favor of the bill and as the
president of the League of Women Voters for the South Bend area. The League is a ninety -six
96)  year old political organization and they encourage the informed and active participation in
government. They use education and advocacy to influence public policy on issues where they
have taken a position after in -depth study. They never support a political candidate or a political
parry and their membership is open to both women and men. 

Elizabeth Bennion,  1507 Sunnymede Ave., stated there is an interim study committee in place
looking to see whether we should redistrict in a different way. We ask the South Bend Common
Council to urge the Special Interim Committee on Redistricting to produce a final report that

9

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25.  2016

supports comprehensive redistricting reform including: The establishment of a citizen -led
commission, the requirement that district boundaries respect: One Person, One Vote; The Voting
Rights Act (VRA); Contiguity (draw districts as one connected area);  Communities of interest, 
city and county boundaries; Political competition; Compactness,  and the requirement that
redistricting decisions disregard individual addresses,  including incumbent addresses and those

of political rivals. 

Because of population changes,  the state does need to redistrict every ten ( 10)  years after the
census but we do not have to do it the way we do now. Currently, the Indiana General Assembly
prepares and adopts redistricting plans. For Congressional districts only, a backup commission
prepares and adopts plans if the state legislature fails to do so.  In this system, The players are the
umpires. Having elected officials draw the maps encourages gerrymandering and both
Republicans and Democrats do this. Depending on how you draw a district, it can drastically
affect the outcome of an election. Ms. Bennion provided examples of malapportionment in the
previous elections in Wisconsin and in Pennsylvania. In states where Republicans controlled the
process, their candidates won roughly 53 percent of the vote and 72 percent of the seats.  In the
states where Democrats controlled the process, their candidates won about 56 percent of the vote
and 71 percent of the seats.  In states where courts, commissions or divided governments drew
the maps, there was a much smaller disparity between the share of the popular vote and the
number of seats won in Congress.  In those states:  Democrats won slightly more than half the
vote and 56 percent of the seats.  Republicans won 46 percent of the vote and 44 percent of the

seats. 

In Indiana, Republicans generally win between 53 percent and 57 percent of the votes in state
legislative races, but they have drawn the maps with such surgical precision that they now find
themselves with 71 percent and 80 percent of the seats in the Indiana House and Senate, 

respectively. 

This happens under both Democrats and Republicans.  Gerrymandering reduces competition:  In
2014, 44 of 100 House candidates and 10 of 25 Senate candidates ran unopposed. 
Gerrymandering also discourages voting: Indiana' s 2014 voter turnout was 28 %, the lowest in
the nation. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner asked what the League' s expectations are for the committee
put together by the Legislature. 

Ms. Bennion responded it is a bi- partisan committee and there are both Republican and
Democratic Co- Chairs. There are people who support and oppose redistricting reform on the
committee in the past and the League would like them to take this issue seriously and look at
these facts. The League is not pushing for a constitutional amendment to the state constitution, 
although that would be one option, but they are suggesting the Legislature itself create the
Commission and then ratify the Commission' s maps. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner asked what makes the League think that the Legislature could
create a true non - partisan commission that won' t be biased. 

Ms. Bennion responded the key is that we have examples of commissions in other states that are
non - partisan and have GIS specialists that have developed much fairer districts in the past than
legislatures have. There are always going to be politics in these decisions but when the maps are
drawn by elected officials we see such horribly drawn districts.  You will never have a perfect
match but, we would expect the numbers to be closer than they are now. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden asked what the public can do to engage in this process. 

Ms. Bennion responded the public can contact members of the interim study committee. The
League had brochures available for contact information on who members of this committee are. 
Those brochures are on file in the City Clerk' s Office. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated in South Bend we see voter turnout around fifty -five
55)  percent Democrat and forty -five (45)  percent Republican, yet the City Council seats are
eight ( 8)  to one ( 1)  Democrat advantage and have been for twenty (20)  some years. 
Councilmember Dr. Varner asked if that would be considered malapportionment. 

10

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

Ms. Bennion responded it does seem the Council over represents Democrats and it may be the
case gerrymandering has occurred. 

Those wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Jason Banicki Critchlow, 3822 W. Ford St.  South Bend, expressed that South Bend has been one
1)  party represented for a very long time and also Indiana has been very one ( 1)  party
represented for a long time and that' s not good. As we get into the era of big data districts can be
drawn not only by precinct but even down to the block. We should have very competitive races
for all our elected officials. 

No one from the public spoke in opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -37.  Councilmember Karen
White seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Council Vice President Oliver Davis resumed the Chair of the Council meeting. 

16 -39

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY

OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, ESTABLISHING A DATE AND

LOCATION FOR THE FORMAL RETIREMENT CEREMONY

OF THE SOUTH BEND CITY FLAG TO A PLACE OF HONOR

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to hear the Substitute Bill 16 -39.  Councilmember
John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston reported the Community Relations Committee met
and sends this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic served as the presenter for this bill. Although the old flag was
never formally the official South Bend Flag it is appropriate to have a retirement ceremony for
the flag. The date is currently scheduled for Friday May 6th 2016 at 10: 30 a.m. at the flagpole at
the South Bend Police Department. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner asked if it is appropriate to have the flag retirement before we
have gotten the symbolism figured out. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic responded that the design has been finalized and we can leave the
symbolism up to the people to decide. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated he feels it is appropriate to have the discussion on the
symbolism of the flag before the retirement ceremony. 

Councilmember Karen White asked how the date of the retirement ceremony was decided upon. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic responded the Honor Guard of the Police Department' s schedule
matched up with that date. 

Kara Kelly, Mayor' s Office with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City Building, reiterated
the date and time of the retirement ceremony. 

No one from the public spoke in support of the bill. 

Gary King, 730 Hill St.  South Bend,  spoke in opposition of the bill. Mr. King expressed concern
that the time would not work for everyone who wished to be there. Mr. King suggested doing a
ceremony at sunset in conjunction with the River Lights. 

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to adopt the Substitute Bill 16 -39.  Councilmember
Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

16 -40

11

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF

THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND DESIGNATING

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH
BEND, INDIANA, COMMONLY KNOWN AS 3605 W. 
CLEVELAND RD,  SOUTH BEND, IN 46628 AN

ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA FOR
PURPOSES OF A (5)  FIVE -YEAR PERSONAL
PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT FORYEDERAL- 
MOGUL POWERTRAIN, LLC

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic reported that the Community Investment Committee met and sends
this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Sarah Heintzelman, Community Investment with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City
Building, served as the presenter for this bill. This is a personal property tax abatement for
Federal Mogul. They are looking at investing $ 11, 315, 200 on new equipment. The total
estimated taxes abated will be $ 447,200. This equipment will not create any new jobs but it will
help retain 544 full time jobs with an annual payroll of over $23 million. 

William Maki, Controller at Federal Mogul 1919 Eagle Point Court South Bend, stated $ 8
million is for equipment for Chrysler products as they are mostly GM currently. They are
expecting increased sales in about a year to a year and a half. The company has invested a lot of
money at the plant for the past six (6)  years, the automotive market is very competitive even
though business is good. The reason we are not adding jobs is we just need to increase sales just
to retain jobs nowadays, which is a challenge with Mexico and other foreign companies
competing against us. This is an investment in South Bend and the company enjoys being here. 

There were no questions from the Council. 

No one spoke either in favor or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -40.  Councilmember Gavin
Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

16 -41

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND DESIGNATING
CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH
BEND, INDIANA, COMMONLY KNOWN AS 4004
TECHNOLOGY DRIVE, SOUTH BEND, IN 46628 AN

ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA FOR
PURPOSES OF A (5)  FIVE -YEAR PERSONAL

PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT FOR: THE

LEBERMUTH COMPANY, INC. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic reported that the Community Investment Committee met and sends
this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Sarah Heintzelman, Community Investment with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City
Building, served as the presenter for this bill. This is a personal property abatement for
Lebermuth, they are planning on investing $1. 2 million for new equipment. Total estimated taxes
abated will be $ 47,436.  This project will create five (5)  full time new jobs with an annual payroll
of $208,000 and will help to retain seventy ( 70)  current jobs with an annual payroll of near $4

million. 

Allen Brown, CEO of Lebermuth Co.,  served as the petitioner for this bill. The Lebermuth Co. 
helps the world taste and smell better, they manufacture flavors and fragrances and are in the
essential oils business. This new equipment will let us develop our fragrances in a more
technologically efficient manner to continue to be competitive with other companies around the
world. This will include one ( 1)  robotic dispensing unit and one ( 1)  semi - automatic unit as well
as some additional construction that will occur inside their current building. 

There were no questions from the Council. 

12

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

No one from the public spoke either in favor or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -41.  Councilmember Karen White
seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

16 -44

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, APPROVING
THE ISSUANCE OF SCRAP METAL /JUNK
DEALER/RECYCLING OPERATION LICENSES FOR
CALENDAR YEAR 2016 PURSUANT TO SECTION 4- 
51 OF THE SOUTH BEND MUNICIPAL CODE

Councilmember John Voorde reported that the Health and Public Safety Committee met and
sends this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to strike from the bill Al Auto Parts 2014 S. 
Lafayette Blvd. Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote
of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Kareemah Fowler, City Clerk of the City of South Bend with offices on the 4th Floor, served as
the presenter for this bill. This is an annual procedure where these entities receive approval from
the Police Department,  Code Enforcement and the Fire Department. 

There were no questions from the Council. 

No one from the public spoke either in favor or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -44 as amended.  Councilmember
Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

16 -45

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF

THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, APPROVING

THE ADVISORY SPECIAL COMMITTEE' S

RECOMMENDATIONS ADDRESSING ELBEL GOLF
COURSE AS A SHORT AND LONG -TERM ASSET OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

Councilmember Randy Kelly reported that the PARC Committee met and sends this bill forward
with a favorable recommendation. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden, Fourth District Councilmember,  served as the petitioner and
presenter of this bill. Councilmember Broden thanked the Co- Sponsors of the bill as well as
everyone who put so much work into this process. We are in a much different place with regard
to this park not only as a valued golf course but also as a truly vital and unique environmental
asset.  The Committee conducted its work over the course of four (4)  meetings with an average
time of two (2)  hours each. The highlight was the amount of public participation and the
transparency that developed in the meetings as well as the documentation that has been
submitted to the Clerk' s Office and is now available to the public. That information allowed the
committee to get some baseline facts out regarding the course that did not exist when this
discussion on Elbel began. Councilmember Broden specifically thanked Elbel for Everyone and
the golfing community for all their sustained work in this process. 

The first recommendation is to engage a golf course consulting firm for all three ( 3)  city run golf
courses.  The Committee found out through this process that the three ( 3)  courses really need to
be analyzed together and this recommendation will commence rather soon. 

The second recommendation is to engage with ecological assessment consultants not just with
Elbel but with all the major parks in the City. The purpose of this recommendation is to flush out
the valuable assets in all of our parks. There are some endangered species at Elbel and we really
need more information regarding them and the wetlands. 

13

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

The third recommendation is that the existing work product developed in the advisory committee
on Elbel such as the ongoing engagement with local experts, City Departments, key stakeholders, 
and the public be integral in the contractual terms of the City hired consultants.  We want to make
sure the work done already is available to these consultants going forward. One of the strong
things which prompted this recommendation was the large level of public involvement. 

The fourth recommendation is that the Park Department and Park Board, in conjunction with
public input, update the City of South Bend five (5)  year Park Master Plan. A advisory or
standing committee must be formed. Throughout the entire process, it was invaluable how much
information was brought out from the community and other groups and it is important to use that
information to update the Master Plan to get everyone working from the same page. An advisory
or standing committee would serve as a resource for the Park Board and Park' s Staff. 

The fifth recommendation is that the Parks Department maintains and manages Elbel Golf
Course throughout 2016 and funds be designated as such for Fiscal Year 2017.  The future use
question was differed at this time and will be contingent /informed by findings and outcomes of
Recommendations one ( 1)  through four (4).  Regardless of the outcome, public access must be
guaranteed and ecological integrity assured. 

The sixth recommendation is that monthly progress reports be provided on Recommendations
one ( 1)  through five (5)  for both the Park Board and the PARC Committee by the Park' s
Department. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden asked that the minutes of the Special Elbel Advisory Committee
be entered into record as well as the supporting documentation and that the documents continue
to be online and in the Clerk' s Office for public inspection as well as for the consultants. Those
documents are as followed: 

02 -29 -16 Special Advisory Committee for Elbel Minutes

03 -07 -16 Special Advisory Committee for Elbel Minutes

03 -21 - 16 Special Advisory Committee for Elbel Minutes

04 -13 - 16 Special Advisory Committee for Elbel Minutes

Park Board Minutes 2013 through 2015

2016 Parks Department Budget — Questions and Responses

2016 Budget Ordinances

2015 Budget Book

2016 Golf Division Budget

2014 Budget Final

Elbel Appraisal Document

Special Elbel Committee Meeting Notices

2015 Monthly Parks Foundation Financial Reports

PARC Committee Minutes 2013 -2015

Park Bond Documents

Parks and Recreation Financial Reports 2012 -2014

2006 to 2015 Ten Year Elbel Golf Financial Packet

2016 Approved Park Projects

Elbel Golf Course Zoning Flood Wetland Map

Elbel with Labeled Holes

14

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

Isolated Wetlands Program

Law Water Rights

Parks Master Plan 2014 -2018

Remarks as prepared for delivery by Mayor Buttigieg at 2016 State of the City

Section 401 Water Quality Certification

State Laws Cited in Bill No.  16 -08 Establishing an Elbel Advisory Committee

Survey Wetlands Area Calculated

TJ Mannen-  Status updates for the Golf Division. 

All documents are available online through the Council Dropbox Link as well as on file in the
City Clerk' s Office. 

There were no questions from the Council. 

Those wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Aaron Perri, Director of the Parks Department with offices at 322 Walter St.,  thanked
Councilmember Broden and the other Committeemembers for their service and leadership during
this process.  Mr. Perri expressed his agreement with all of the recommendations and also the
Parks Board unanimously approved the recommendations as well. The process of community
engagement and hiring consultants is moving along and there will be reports to the Council
shortly. 

Jennifer Betz, 511 South Saint Joseph Street South Bend, thanked the Special Advisory
Committee and the Council for all of their work on this issue. It has been a very long process and
it is still ongoing. She stated that Resolution Six was not approved unanimously it was approved
three ( 3)  to two ( 2).  She expressed concern about the work going back to the Park Board and
PARC Committee because of the broken public trust and stressed she would rather the work
continue at the Special Committee. It is also harder to follow this process when it is at multiple
levels.  She also thought the Elbel Specific language was missed in Recommendation Two. 

Paul Blasko,  322 E. Colfax Ave Apt 209 South Bend, spoke in favor of the resolution and
thanked the Special Advisory Committee. He stated his encouragement of the process and is
excited to see what Aaron Perri and the Park Board will come up with for Elbel including the
ecological study and integrity. 

Sally Durengozski,  17888 Amberwood Ln. South Bend, thanked the Advisory Committee and
their efforts. She questioned whether the Committee could disband on its own because it was
formed by the Council. It should be up to the Council whether their work is done.  The
community has reason to still be concerned about what will happen with the work of the
consultants and work of management. It would be difficult to forget how rattled the community
is from the breach of trust from the Mayor' s Office, the Park Board and even the PARC
Committee. All of this does not give the community a good feeling to see what will happen six
6)  months from now. She suggested the Special Advisory Committee continue because they
were the ones to step up and really do the work the community wanted. 

Those wishing to speak in opposition: 

Ricky Klee, 2010 Hollywood Place South Bend IN, thanked the members of the Special
Advisory Committee and commend their hard work. His concern is that the Mayor stated the
Special Advisory Committee should be exemplary in its inclusion of diverse community voices
and perspectives. The artificially limited time of the Committee resulted in many voices in the
community not being heard especially racially and then also economic diversity. That is a serious
omission and should cause the Council to send the Committee back. There was also no school
involvement in the process.  There was also no presentation given to the Committee about turning
Elbel into a nature preserve and that idea should have been addressed. 

15

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25.  2016

Councilmember Jo M. Broden gave a rebuttal as the petitioner. There should be a correction of
the record in regard to the unanimous vote, it was a three ( 3)  to two (2)  vote on the sixth
recommendation and she was on the losing end of that vote. The intention of the wording of the
recommendations when including key stakeholders is to work with educators going forward. The
public is certainly invited to and encouraged to follow this process and the intent is to have as
much community involvement as possible. The park wide natural resource plan does include
Elbel and that is the intention. Councilmember Jo M. Broden stated it was her belief as well that
the Committee should continue but again she was on the losing end of that vote. There was an
outstanding level of expertise and public involvement in this Committee and that should be taken
into account. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston thanked everyone for their work but we should look
into the Committee continuing. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly thanked everyone involved in the process. It was his feeling that
the Special Advisory Committee did do their job and submit some solid recommendations that
now the Park Department and Park Board need to run with. For the Committee to continue is in
some degree stepping on the toes of the people who have the Parks and Elbel as their purview
and he has complete faith in Aaron Perri and his team. It will continue to be an open and

transparent process that will engage golfers, ecologists and educators. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner also thanked everyone for participating in the process and
stated there is a lot of emotion out there. If this is going to be continued it is his opinion that you
need to add a resources committee to see how these ideas would be funded. It would be a shame
to get into all these great ideas and then not have the planning to fund them. There are options
such as grants and it is something that needs to be looked into. As a City, ultimately we can only
fund what we can fund. 

Councilmember John Voorde thanked the Elbel for Everyone group for saving Elbel Park. When
he first heard of the City' s proposal to sell the park he was taken aback and was disappointed. 
Through this process he now understands and appreciates how special Elbel Park really is to this
City. The people who came together to share their concern and passion opened his eyes to what a
priceless resource Elbel Park is. The effort to keep an eye out for what is going on whether it is
this Committee or another effort is important because trust has been breached and the City has
admitted they made a mistake for proposing the sale.  The question of who has the authority to
lease is still not answered.  State law seems to have some ambiguity if it is the Council or the
Park Board. It was also his opinion that this Council consider looking into using the state law on
the books to give the Common Council more muscle and oversight over the Park Board. A Park
Board that consists of members appointed by one ( 1)  elected person and a department run by a
department head also appointed by one ( 1)  person does not necessarily have the range of
opinions that can come from a group like this. Councilmember Voorde did express faith in Aaron
Perri and the new members of the Park Board he met during this process. He attended all four (4) 
of these meetings and could not be more gratified by the public response and participation. There
does need to be continuing oversight because he is not ready to turn it back over to the Park
Board because we need to keep an eye on things as the trust needs to be earned. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic thanked the members of the public for all their input during this
process.  He supports the resolution and Aaron Perri' s' efforts but that does not mean we become
disconnected we need to monitor what is going to happen in the future. 

Councilmember Karen White thanked everyone for their great participation and it' s a great start. 
Everyone came with openness,  good questions, concerns as well as frustrations.  The issue of
continuing the Committee was three ( 3)  to two (2)  and she was on the losing side. The Council
must maintain communication and remain engaged in the process.  We cannot be kept abreast
after the fact. The work of the Advisory Committee was phenomenal and people really did want
to work together. There is still much work to be done and it is very important the Council
identifies some mechanism by which information can flow horizontally as well as vertically. All
partners involved need to maintain a level of communication and honesty as we move forward. 
Councilmember White also wished to thank the Clerk' s Office who did an awesome level of

16

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

work for the Committee, minutes were very comprehensive and made available.  The information
they gathered on Drop Box is tremendous and that is a model to move forward as well. 

Council Vice President thanked everyone for their work in this process as we have come such a
long way from when this all started. The recommendations lead us to a safer and more
productive plan to take care of Elbel and the parks. He also thinks it is not time to say goodbye to
the Committee. The Council was the group that formed the Committee and it is not up to the
committee to disband themselves it is up to the Council. The issue of the forty -five (45)  days was
just to make sure we were going to have Elbel running this year. It was his understanding and
hope that it would be a much longer process.  There is nothing wrong with having more
committees as a Council because we need more time for many of these decisions.  This process
has allowed people to come and not only focus on the parks but a specific park and you cannot
do that at a normal Common Council meeting. We have a group of interested citizens in this
community on this issue and we should use that knowledge. If we use this committee process we
will have a stronger city. We need to look at passing this resolution and then also vote to see
whether we should disband this Committee or not. He recommended that the vote to disband this
Committee be on the agenda for May 9th 2016. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden stated in the original resolution there was a forty -five (45)  day
time period identified. That time expired on April 15th 2016 so the opportunity may be to create a
new resolution to extend the Committee. 

Council Attorney Kathleen Cekanski - Farrand stated any member of the Council can ask for a
new resolution to extend the Committee. 

Council Vice President stated we do not have to make this decision tonight but his opinion in
accepting this resolution tonight does not disband the Committee. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Substitute Bill 16 -45.  Councilmember
Randy Kelly seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic served as Chair of the Common Council meeting for the hearing on
Bill 16 -46

16 -46

A RESOLUTION TO ESTABLISH A 9- MEMBER
ADVISORY SPECIAL COMMITTEE TO STUDY AND

RECOMMEND ALL REASONABLE AND VIABLE

OPTIONS FOR MULTIPLE OFF LEASH DOG PARKS
TO BE LOCATED IN THE CITY SOUTH BEND, 
INDIANA

Councilmember John Voorde reported that the Health and Public Safety Committee met and
sends this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis served as the presenter and petitioner for this bill. This bill would
establish a nine ( 9)  member advisory special committee to study all viable and reasonable
options for multiple off leash dog parks. Other cities in Indiana have multiple dog parks and
South Bend only just opened our first one.  We as a City need to study our own park lands and
see what areas should be used for certain purposes. We hope that we can have multiple dog parks
for large and small dogs possibly. Councilmember Oliver Davis thanked his co- sponsors as well. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston stated she thought this is a good opportunity to engage
people and see what their interests are on this type of park. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated this has been done in other communities and looks like
if it is run properly it can be very successful and we should try to do it right which necessitates
getting as much information as possible. 

Councilmember Karen White stated she likes that this calls for multiple dog parks and Mr. Perri
has expressed his support for this initiative as well. 

17

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

Councilmember Oliver Davis stated he does not mind if he was to be on this Committee and he
looks forward to the possibility. 

Those wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Charles Smith, 2023 South Taylor St.  South Bend, stated there is a lot of interest in the
community for having more dog parks.  The temporary dog park is a good start and there should
certainly be more permanent locations.  South Bend should meet the needs of the community for
both the people and dogs and this resolution does that. 

Jesse Davis, P. O.  Box 10205 South Bend IN, stated Mishawaka has at least one ( 1)  dog park
already and its time South Bend got one too. For people who don' t have a fenced in lot it is very
hard for their dogs to live on a leash the whole time. They need to able to be interact with other
dogs and so many people cannot put up fences for their dogs. Dogs are just like people they need
to socialize with other dogs and don' t do well if they are not well. Yes there needs to be rules
and we can definitely sort that out. 

No one wished to speak in opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -46.  Councilmember Regina
Williams- Preston seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of seven ( 7)  ayes and one
1)  nay. ( Councilmember Jo M. Broden). 

BILLS FIRST READING

23 -16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA, AMENDING VARIOUS SECTIONS
CHAPTER 17,  ARTICLE 10 OF THE SOUTH BEND
MUNICIPAL CODE TO INCLUDE NEW RULES AND

REGULATIONS FOR ASSESSMENT OF

INSTALLATION CHARGES

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to send Bill 23 -16 to the Utilities Committee
and set public hearing for May 23rd.  Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston seconded the
motion which carried by a roll call vote of six (6)  ayes and two (2)  nays. ( Councilmember Gavin
Ferlic and Councilmember John Voorde) 

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

16 -38

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, APPROVING
A PETITION OF THE AREA BOARD OF ZONING
APPEALS FOR THE PROPERTY LOCATED AT 2926- 
3302 WEST SAMPLE STREET SOUTH BEND, IN 46628

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to send Bill 16 -38 to the Zoning and
Annexation Committee and set public hearing for May 9th 2016.  Councilmember John Voorde
seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

PENDING INACTIVE /DORMANT BILLS

22 -96

18

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING
ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED ON THE
SOUTH SIDE OF RUSKIN STREET ( BETWEEN
ROBERTS &  EMERSON STREETS)  IN THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA 46615

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

38 -96

33 -02

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING
ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED AT 601
BLAINE AVE IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 
INDIANA

AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, ANNEXING
TO AND BRINGING WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF
SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, AND AMENDING THE

ZONING ORDINANCE FOR CERTAIN LAND IN

PORTAGE TOWNSHIP CONTIGUOUS THEREWITH; 

RAITT CORPORATION, AN INDIANA

CORPORATION) (22,  500 BLOCK OF S. R. #23,  SOUTH

BEND, INDIANA 46619) 

72 -03

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING

ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED AT 1314

CALIFORNIA AVE. IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA

68 -05

08 -08

70 -10

AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF

THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, ANNEXING

TO AND BRINGING WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, AND AMENDING THE

ZONING ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED IN

CLAY TOWNSHIP CONTIGUOUS THEREWITH: 

COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT 44,  RICHARD & 

MARSHA PULLIN AND SHIRLEY COMBS
APPROXIMATELY 200 FEET EAST OF THE

NORTHEAST CORNER OF S. R. #23 AND MCERLAIN

STREET,  SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING

ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY BETWEEN 3515

MCKINLEY AVENUE AND APPROXIMATELY 125

FEET EAST OF PRESTON DRIVE, COUNCILMANIC
DISTRICT 4 IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING

ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED AT 101

NORTH KENMORE STREET,  COUNCILMANIC

DISTRICT 2 IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to strike Bills 22 -96,  38 -96,  33 -02,  72 -03,  68 -05, 
08 -08 and 70 -10.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a voice
vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

NEW BUSINESS

There was no new business. 

19

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25.  2016

PRIVILEGE OF THE FLOOR

Linda Wolfson, 809 Park Ave. South Bend, spoke about the two bills that are no longer being
considered regarding the increased South Bend' s code violation fees by 11. 5%.  The bills were
withdrawn before they could be thoroughly discussed and acted upon by Council members.  At
the Community Forum for Economic Justice they have repeatedly heard resident' s questions and
comments about the policies and practices of the Department of Code Enforcement.  One concern
is a perception of inequity, especially with regard to residents of the West Side.  On the one hand, 
residents are concerned that Code Enforcement ignores violations that should be addressed.  On
the other hand, we also are being told of examples where Code Enforcement unfairly targets
some homeowners with excessive violations and fines that are far beyond the ability of the
homeowners to pay. Since many of the neighborhoods affected are low income and or
communities of color, there is a concern that Code Enforcements policies are discriminatory and
inequitable. If inequity exists,  increasing fees will only magnify that inequity. She shared some
of their concerns at the Health and Public Safety Committee Meeting on January 19th,  the day
that the bills first were on the Council agenda.  Councilman Voorde asked us to prepare a list of
written questions and the issue was tabled. We provided that list the following week. Additional
questions were submitted by individual council members and by at least one local developer. 
These questions were to be discussed at the new committee meeting on February 8th.  However, 
that discussion was postponed at the request of Mr. Wilkerson, Code Director. A special
committee meeting to discuss the bills was finally scheduled for April 6th.  The Council' s small
meeting room was filled. However, no one from the Department of Code Enforcement was in
attendance.  An email, received by Mr. Voorde that afternoon, informed him that both bills would
be withdrawn. It is not my intent to repeat the testimony of the many community members who
testified at the meeting, since five (5)  Councilmembers were present and minutes were taken. 
Also, there are additional community members here today to share their personal interactions
with Code with regard to illegal dumping, excessive code fees, and the deterioration of their
neighborhood quality of life. We are concerned that the questions submitted to the Director of
Code Enforcement were never answered. We are especially concerned about the consequences
that would occur if inequities in Code Enforcement are documented. We ask your assistance, as
our elected representatives,  to initiate a public investigation of the policies and practices of South
Bend' s Code Enforcement. Ms. Wolfson submitted her typed comments to the City Clerk' s
Office to be added to the public record. 

Johnathan Anderstrom, 526 W. Western Ave, a recent article in the South Bend Tribune
announced a potential charter school that may come to the downtown area. Mr. Anderstrom is
the chair of the board for the proposed school. People either love charter schools or they hate
them. Mr. Anderstrom stated he is not against traditional public schools and does not believe that
the teachers are to blame. In addition to his wife being a first grade public school teacher, he has
worked hard to connect students to after school tutoring programs from his center and partner
with SBCSC. Unfortunately many issues plaguing our school system are bigger than what our
city can handle alone. Many issues are the direct results of federal or state mandates for public
schools. Every charter school is different than the next. We have chosen a supporting
organization, Team CFA, which will not control the legislative body of the school as an
educational management organization but rather as a non - profit organization. Additionally they
have chosen to go through the most stringent charter school authorizer in the state of Indiana. 
They have submitted their application about a month ago and are in the public hearing portion of
the process. They have held public meetings, door to door community surveys, provided the
community with an online survey and a public forum is scheduled next Monday May 2nd at 5: 30
p.m. at the St. Joseph County Public Library opened to all. Mr. Anderstrom also provided
information on the school to be on file in the Clerk' s Office. 

Samuel Brown, 222 E. Navare St., informed the Council they will soon get a letter from him
concerning the Martin Luther King Street. This is a historical event and we need to recognize
that. He stated he has some issues with Code Enforcement that he will talk about on a later date. 
He believes in 2017 a woman will be president of this country. 

Jason Banicki Critchlow, 3822 West Ford St. South Bend, stated he was embarrassed by the
process tonight. Usually when we see people speaking for an initiative by the Mayor, they

Ti7

REGULAR MEETING

APRIL 25,  2016

typically seems to be young white and affluent. This leaves out the large scope of diversity in our
city we talk so proudly about all the time. We wasted a lot of time today on that issue, yet we just
had a report come out last week that violent crime is up thirty (30)  percent this year. At what
point do we say is it worth wasting an hour for a flag when people cannot walk around their
neighborhoods? The only way we are really going to shed that dying city label is by providing
good paying economic jobs that allow people to support their families and by a safe friendly and
inviting city and we are failing on those fronts. Yes we are adding jobs but a lot of time they are
low paying part time jobs. These are challenges as we move forward we have to turn that tide to
make the city better for everybody. Mr. Banicki Critchlow asked as budget time begins soon we
have to come up with a plan to address our infrastructure needs. 

Jan Maciulski,  1117 S.  31St South Bend IN, spoke against the proposed fire station being planned
at Potawatomi Park. The demonstration given by the Fire Dept. tells people that there are no
alternative sites and that presentation is not fair, there are other alternatives.  We could renovate
the historically landmarked old fire station which is only five ( 5)  blocks different. A fire station
in a park with change the entire dynamics of that park. The park should stay a park because once
it' s gone it' s gone for good. There are still many questions concerning the noise and how that
will affect the zoo and other concerns by the residents. 

Chuck Buder,  15893 Ashville Lane Granger IN, spoke about protecting the night' s sky. He asked
the Council to strive to protect the real stars themselves.  He has shared information with the
Mayor and would like to share it with the Council as well. As the City invests tax payer dollars
into lighting schemes and in all future city projects, the City should insist on adhering to three ( 3) 
basic principles the first being all outdoor lighting should be full cut off or fully shielded. 
Second, lights should minimize glare and light trespass.  Third, if LED lights are used they should
be temperature rated under 3, OOOk.  Supporting documents to his comments can be found at
nightwise.org. 

Marvin Crayton, 305 S.  Lake St.  South Bend,  spoke about his concerns with Code Enforcement. 
Two (2)  of his neighbors got a ticket for having a mattress outside for one - hundred ( 100)  dollars. 
Code Enforcement officers with no experience are always placed on the West Side where there
are the most problems. People are building privacy fences on the right of way but where is Code
Enforcement? The thing we need to write tickets on we don' t but then target two (2)  seniors to
remove that one mattress is horrible. 

Huey Scoby has been working on making Martin Luther King Street for seven ( 7)  years and the
Council appointed him. He is concerned about the MLK Committee and how it is working. How
can you make a street committee to overrule his street committee? He turned in to the City
Clerk' s Office more than seven - hundred ( 700)  signatures of people protesting the proposed street
route. Martin Luther King deserves better than what that Committee put together. 

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business to come before the Council, President Tim Scott adjourned the
meeting at 10: 34 p.m. 

21

