REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend, Indiana met in the
Council Chambers of the County -City Building on Monday, July 27, 2015 at 7: 00 p.m.  The
meeting was called to order by Council President Tim Scott and the Invocation and Pledge to the
Flag were given. 

ROLL CALL

COUNCILMEMBERS: 

Present: 

Tim Scott
Henry Davis,  Jr. 
Valerie Schey
Dr. Fred Ferlic

1 st District, (President) 
2 °d District (arrived 7: 08 pm) 
3` d District
4'  District

Dr. David Varner

5'  District

Oliver J.  Davis

Gavin Ferlic

6'  District

At -Large

Karen L. White

At- Large,  Chairpersoijkmn

of the Whole

Absent: 

OTHERS PRESENT: 

Kathleen Cekanski- Farrand

Adriana Rodriguez

John Voorde

Janice I. Talboom

Kareemah Fowler

REPORT FROM THE SUB -1

Councilmember Oliver Davis
the Council be accepted and I
to
which carried

solid waslq
been continr
August 24th. 

July 13th,  2015,  meeting of
Schey seconded the motion

re for sewer insurance, yard waste removal, or

I
hos
rate increase and yard waste have been continued to

is have been continued.  Sewer insurance has

Councilmember Karen
Utilities Committee on

fficed for the public there will be a separate meeting with the
at 3: 30pm. 

15 - 68

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND, 

INDIANA,  PUBLICLY CONGRATULATING WNDU

AS

IT

CELEBRATES

ITS

60TH

ANNIVERSARY

AND

HONORING

THE

COMMUNICATIONS LEGACY OF REV. 

THEODORE M.  HESBURGH, 

C. S. C. 

6A" 

the South Bend Common Council notes that on February 19,  1955,  Rev.  Theodore
M. Hesburgh,  C. S. C.,  President and Rev. Edmund P.  Joyce,  C. S. C.,  Executive Vice - President of
the University of Notre Dame,  conducted the groundbreaking ceremony which kicked off the
construction by Thomas L. Hickey Construction Company, Inc.  of a $ 750,000 building designed
to house the WNDU television station studios.  This one -story brick building,  being of similar
architecture to the men' s dormitories located on the North Quad of the Notre Dame campus,  was
soon completed, and on July 15,  1955,  the WNDU TV station first signed on the air; and

6A" 

the Council further recognizes that the television studio was formally dedicated on
September 30 and October 1,  1955,  when NBC executives Robert Sarnoff and Frank Folsom, as
well as Coca Cola executives were guests of honor at the University.  A live television broadcast

1

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

took place from the ND Fieldhouse of Coke Time with Eddie Fisher. The weekend events included
the telecasting of the academic convocation where Father Hesburgh gave an honorary Doctor of
Science degree to Brigadier General David Sarnoof„  the principal speaker of the formal studio
opening;  followed by Eddie Fisher singing and music by the Notre Dame band; and

6A" 

the Common Council notes that among the many others in attendance at the formal
dedication of the WNDU television studios that weekend in 1955,  included Indiana Governor
George N.  Craig,  South Bend Mayor John Scott,  Bernard Barth,  Managing Director &  Tom
Hamilton Sales Manager, along with the Moreau Seminar Choir, and the Notre Dame Glee Club. 
Festivities also included attending the Notre Dame - Indiana football game where Coach Terry
Brennan, Paul Hornung, and the Fighting Irish beat the Hoosiers 19 -0; and

6A" 

in November of 2005, the University agreed to sell the station to Atlanta -based Gray
Television,  Inc.  for $85 million, with the sale being based on " finding a buyer that is committed
to the local community &  to quality news and entertainment programming"  according to John
Affleck - Graves,  University Vice - President. 

Section I.  On behalf of all ofthe residents of the Ci
is honored to recognize the rich history of WNDU- 
enduring legacy of Rev.  Theodore M. Hesburgh,  C
creative people"  to dedicate themselves to being part
1955,  and continues to provide quality broadcastin

Section II.  The Common Council si
persons who have worked at WNDU
success for many decades to come. A

1

the Common Council
Anniversary, and the
ginative & 

ed " 

e scene"  in

reality

of the many dedicated
hes WNDU continued

and after its adoption by the

Oliver J.  Davis, 6'  District

Henry Davis, Jr., 

Derek D. Dieter, At Large

Valerie Schey,  3'  District

Gavin Ferlic, At Large

Dr. Fred Ferlic, 4'  District

Karen L. White, At Large

Dr. David Varner, 5'  District

Kathleen Cekanski- Fanand, Council Attorney

fi' °°edduQ

day' s  4 x'015. 

Office of the City Clerk

Pete Buttigieg, Mayor of South Bend

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

Councilmember Oliver Davis presented Resolution 15 -68 to the full Council.  Councilmember
Oliver Davis stated we are in a season this year of celebrating our 150'  year, so it is unique that
they celebrate their 60'  year. 

Councilmember Henry Davis, Jr arrived at 7: 08pm) 

John O' Brien made remarks: thank you for having us this evening. We appreciate this recognition. 
It is a true pleasure to serve this community and are hoping to do so for another 60 years. 

Maureen McFadden made remarks: thank you very much.  I feel a little like I' m in 7"  grade again, 
since Mr. Voorde,  my teacher is here.  Thank you for recognizing WNDU.  As you may know
Terry and I were born and raised here.  We always felt welcome from everybody in the city of
South Bend. We are so thrilled to still be here.  We hope to keep it going, but don' t know if we' ll
still be here in 60 years, but thank you so much for recognizing us. 

Councilmember Karen White — I would
broadcasting and your commitment to
thought the two of you were twins. 
county and to share that we have f

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic

I always enjoyed watching your

program. 

Counci

Mo an

success a

er Dr. Davi — 
and it will prob

Se
e the 1

e long -term.  I

e I kn

e

e first thing I remember with television is seeing
g I see is Mo and Terry.  Congratulations on your

thou a lot better than I do.  Good luck. 

CouncilmembeNairlic — 

1 the apple doesn' t fall far from the tree.  For many of you
who don' t knos, Vi
Fadden was a Korean War veteran and lost his arm during
was probably the most delightful woman that I' ve known. 
the Korean con
So I would liku two for both your parents,  first of all.  Secondly for the way
h Bend is a better place because of you two.  You have given us
you serve the c
straight - forward news reporting and it' s very much appreciated.  Thanks to the both of you. 

Councilmember Valerie Schey — Thank you so much for what you do.  I enjoy watching your
show.  As a personal note I do admire your ability to work so closely with your sibling.  I have
two sisters,  I don' t think I can do what you do.  Thank you. 

Councilmember Henry Davis, Jr — I want to say thank you as well.  I feel the same way you felt
Maureen, when you were talking about John.  One of the situations where you see people before
you while you' re growing up and they' re still there.  At the end of the day congratulations and
thank you so much for your commitment to the community. 

Council President Tim Scott — I' m a transplant, the first week I got here I met your dad.  I still
have great memories ofyour dad.  I' m a Missouri Mafia member.  I know plenty of my alum come
through WNDU and you guys do a great job.  I know what it' s like to be in public service,  it goes
beyond just the news reporting.  It is what you do for the community.  We appreciate the station, 
you guys,  and all the other talent that is here and everything that you do to inform the public.  So
thank you. 

3

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

There being no one present wishing to speak to the Council in favor of or opposition to this bill, 
Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt by acclimation Resolution 15 -68. 
Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 

ayes. 

15 - 69

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND

INDIANA

PUBLICLY

RECOMMITTING

TO

FULL

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT

ADA UPON THIS TWENTY FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF ITS ENACTMENT

WHEREAS, on July 26,  1990 President George H. W. Bush signed into law the Americans

With Disabilities Act ( ADA) to ensure the civil rights of persons with disabilities;  and

WHEREAS,  the ADA established a cle
elimination of discrimination against individuals

WHEREAS,  enactment of the ADA at thi
into South Bend' s Human Rights ordinance has
disabilities by reducing barriers,  changing perce
community life, all of which enhance the strength a

WHEREAS,  the full promise of
continue all efforts to fully implement the, 

mandate for the

to

asing
South B

Is and its incorporation
for A ericans with
ipation in

munity, and

commitment

to

WHEREAS, the City of S
has been made by reaffirming the
efforts to reach full ADA com

end m

iples of

cen

and

and recognize the progress that
n and recommitting the City' s

OF

1V0oil

COUNCIL OF THE CITY

commit

working
activitiecommits t

Xander n behal

and plaommodati

1 its re

s,  the City of South Bend Indiana, reaffirms its
rd full
A compliance in all of its programs,  services, and
mote the fiull promise ofthe ADA among private employers
ithin the City of South Bend. 

SECTION II. 

on shall be in fiull force and effect from and after its adoption

ouncil and appro

e Mayor. 

tt,  Is'  District

Oliver J.  Davis, 6'  District

iavis,  Jr., 2'  District

Derek D. Dieter, At Large

Schey, 3'  District

Gavin Ferlic, At Large

I Ferlic, 4'  District

Karen L. White, At Large

id Varner, 5'  District

Kathleen Cekanski- Farrand, Council Attorney

4

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

Attest: 

John Voorde,  City Clerk

Approved this

day of

12015

Pete Buttigieg, Mayor of South Bend

resolution before you. 

Muhammad Shabazz, Secretary: Human Rights Com ' 
South Bend Human Rights Commission investigates

also educates the public on how to detect and prevent
of South Bend citizens and minorities includidifthd
we unanimously endorsed resolution 15 -6
member, many claims of discrimination b
that it is less frequent than what it
celebrating 25 years of progress, 
constant vigilance both on

sabled p
Com

s. 

so as a r

319 N. 

i

So

Bend —The

sabled. 

ou.  Ha

t is yet

cud

der t

nati

rkplace.  It

Our
ssion consists
meeting on July 15th,  2015
as a commission

ted.  I also know

to
td this resolution
ob is ongoing and requires a
critics.  We fully support with

enthusiasm the passage of

Councilmember

erlic — TW you for your service

a Social Worker, I truly appreciate the work that you do
I learned more about that ( 5)  five -years ago when I tore my

Councilmember Oliver
especially with the ADA is
ACL.  All of a sudden you really respect where they have handicap signs.  You don' t think about
that when you have all your ligaments in place.  But when you don' t have them working, it is a
different ball game.  When you look for signs,  you see what people have to go through.  Makes
you think twice about people parking in the wrong spots.  I thank you for your work, as you help
a lot of people whether they are temporarily or permanently in a situation needing the ADA
work. Thank you and keep up the great work

Councilmember Dr. David Varner — Congratulations on the 25 years of progressive service and
best wishes in the future. 

Councilmember Dr. Fred Ferlic — You' re obviously doing a great job we had eight (8)  well - 
qualified candidates for one spot for this year.  So congratulations. 

Councilmember Valerie Schey — Thank you so much for bringing this resolution before us. 
Clearly there are so many members in our community that have to overcome so much just to go
about their daily lives.  I' m glad that you brought this before us tonight so we as a city Council

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

can support the efforts;  so when we talk about inclusion it is truly every member of our
community. 

Councilmember Henry Davis Jr. — I have the same opinion of my council colleagues.  I want to
say in the past we discussed the necessity of having a Human Rights Commission.  Since we' re
beginning to talk about the budget, we mentioned having a county -wide office so we can support
the other areas in the city with their issues,  making sure all the other people are included as well. 
I think it would be vital and I know all of you could do the job.  Again, thank you for your
service to the community

Council President Tim Scott — Again, I repeat what everyone else said.  It is amazing what you
guys are doing. The ADA is so critical and I' m glad we' re recognizing this. It' s very important
to our nation and a forward - thinking city.  We' ve talked about that so many times and you guys
have gone above and beyond the duty.  I' m glad that we have the ADA in our fore -front right

now. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

Those wishing to speak in favor of: 

Samuel Brown, 222 E. Navarre St,  South Bend— I
Better Government.  We cannot say enough about the
they do.  They do a lot of work behind the scenes that '
the council is recognizing them for their outstanding work. 

n Rights

t get

y( 

United for a
onAthe work
ad, tonight

Glenda Wright- Hernandez, 702 E.  Sot

this with a friend of mine,  who' s gone
changes to be made.  I am grateful t

aware for the need of

s are

DA and for the
imR.  There are still
and hopefully will continue

19 N. Niles,  South Bend —I

is great writing.  Thank you Aladean and our
ike to remind our community that we have a
led.  Every day we get someone home from
of come back whole.  It is up to us as an

do

ake sure they are made to feel at home.  So with this
to those people coming home and to those that are
i' re a part of us. 

v Drive, South Bend — I' ve been on the commission for ten
there, I' ve learned a lot about equality.  I appreciate living in a

passage we nopaq
already here,  that

Penny Hughes, 

community that really means what they say. 
your consideration on this resolution. 

We stand for equality for all people.  I appreciate

There being no one present wishing to speak to the Council in opposition to this bill, 
Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt by acclimation Resolution 15 -69. 
Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 

ayes. 

ANNOUNCEMENT: REPRESENTING THE CITY ADMINISTRATION WILL BE CHIEF OF

STAFF — BRIAN PAWLOWSKI

REPORTS OF CITY OFFICES
There were no city reports from City Office

RESOLVE INTO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE
At 7: 31 p.m. Council President Tim Scott requested a motion to resolve into the Committee of
the Whole. So moved by Councilmember Oliver Davis.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded

0

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes.  Councilmember White, Chairperson, 
presiding. 

Councilmember White, explained the procedures to be followed for tonight' s meeting in
accordance with Article 1,  Section 2 -11 of the South Bend Municipal Code. 

Councilmember White stated that a brochure may be found on the railing in the Council
Chambers explaining those procedures. 

24 - 15

PUBLIC HEARING ON A BILL OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE

CITY OF SOUTH BEND INDIANA AMENDING VARIOUS SECTIONS OF

CHAPTER 17 ARTICLE 7 OF THE SOUTH BEND MUNICIPAL CODE

TO DECREASE THE SEWER INSURANCE PROGRAM DEDUCTIBLE AND

TO MAKE OTHER PROGRAM CHANGES

Councilmember Mr.  Gavin Ferlic made a

Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the

ill 24 -15
indefinitely. 
a voice vote of eight ( 8) 

ayes

2015. 

eight

25 - 15

PUBLIC HEARING ON ; 

CITY OF SOUTH BEND

16 ARTICLES 2 AND 4

PROVIDE YARD WASTE

CONTAINERS

26 - 15

PUBLIC H

CITY OF

SECTIONS

TO ADJU,' 

COUNCIL OF THE

ONS

CHAPTER

CODE TO

FURNISHED

ON COUNCIL OF THE

ING CHAPTER 16, 

I BEND MUNICIPAL CODE

ION AND DISPOSAL OF

NNW1 & 
bill 26 -15 to August 24th
the motion which carried by a voice vote of

Councilmember O
by a voice vote of ei

ATTEST: 

requested

to rise and report to full Council.  So moved by
fiber Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried

ATTEST: 

John Voorde,  City Clerk

Karen L. White,  Chairperson

Committee of the Whole

REGULAR MEETING RECONVENED
Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend reconvened in the
Council Chambers on the fourth floor of the County -City Building at 7: 32 p.m. Council
President Tim Scott, presided with eight ( 8)  members present. 

BILLS - THIRD READING
There were no Third Readings to come before the Council

7

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 201

RESOLUTIONS

15 - 65

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA,  APPROVING A PETITION OF THE SOUTH

BEND BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS FOR THE PROPERTY LOCATED

AT 3016 PORTAGE AVE.  SOUTH BEND, 

IN 46601

WHEREAS,  Indiana Code Section 36 -7 -4- 918. 6,  requires the Common Council
to give notice pursuant to Indiana Code Section 5-  14- 1. 5 -5,  of its intention to consider
Petitions from the Board of zoning Appeals for approval or disapproval;  and

WHEREAS,  THE Common Council must take action within sixty ( 60) days after

the Board of Zoning Appeals makes its recommendation to the Council;  and

WHEREAS,  the Common Council

is required to make a determination in writing

on such requests pursuant to Indiana Code Section 36 -7 -4- 918. 4,  and

WHEREAS,  the South Bend Board of Zoning A eats h s made a

recommendation,  pursuant to applicable stateJft

In order to permit to construct and
classified SF1 and Variances: 
From the required hard

1. 
2.  Fr.  Required landsc

agriculUundin

E

E

lity on a property

ocated in a wooded area with

the Petitioner,  and after proper public hearing, 

etition of the South Bend Board of Zoning

of the City Clerk. 

City of South Bend,  Indiana,  hereby finds
to the public health,  safety,  comfort, 
of general welfare: 

are or adversely affect the use of the adjacent

PAI

3

The proposed use will be consistent with the character of the district in which
it is located and the land uses authorized therein: 
The proposed use is compatible with the recommendations of the City of
South Bend Comprehensive Plan: 

SECTION IV.  Approval
is subject to the Petitioner complying the reasonable
conditions established by the Board of Zoning Appeals which are on file in the
Office of the City Clerk. 

SECTION V.  The Resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after its
adoption by the Common Council and approval by the Mayor. 

E

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

Iffir 1ilTTi.SiiTW .  u u .  I * T.1Rii.711

Councilmember Oliver Davis,  Chairperson, Zoning &  Annexation Committee met this afternoon
and send bill 15 -65 to the full Council favorably. 

Presenter: Chuck Bulot, Building Commissioner,  125 S.  Lafayette Blvd, South Bend — At the
July 1st meeting this special exception was read to allow a telecommunications tower in a SF
district, variance from required parts,  surface access to gravel, and for the required landscaping
to no landscaping comes to you with a favorable recommendation

This being the time heretofore set for the
opponents were given an opportunity to l

on thdlqWe bill, proponents and

WHEREAS,  THE Common Council must take action within sixty ( 60) days after

the Board of Zoning Appeals makes its recommendation to the Council;  and

WHEREAS, the Common Council

is required to make a determination in writing

on such requests pursuant to Indiana Code Section 36 -7 -4- 918.4,  and

WHEREAS, the South Bend Board of Zoning Appeals has made a

recommendation,  pursuant to applicable state law. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE IT RESOLVED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY
OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA as follows: 

SECTION I.  The Common Council has provided notice of the hearing on the Petition
from the Board of Zoning Appeals persona to Indiana Code Section 5- 14- 1. 5 -5, 
requesting that a Special Exception be granted for the property located at:  4085

E

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 201

Meghan Beeler Court in order to permit a recreational use for a batting &  pitching facility
in a " LI°  District. 

SECTION II.  Following a presentation by the Petitioner,  and after proper public hearing, 
the Common Council hereby approves the petition of the South Bend Board of Zoning
Appeals, copy of which in on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 

SECTION III.  The Common Council of the City of South Bend,  Indiana,  hereby finds
that the proposed use will not be injurious to the public health,  safety,  comfort, 
community moral standards, convenience of general welfare: 

SECTION IV.  Approval is subject to tl
conditions established by the Board of
Office of the City Clerk. 

ng the reasonable
are on file in the

SECTION V.  The Resolution shall be in
adoption by the Common CouncilAIM

effect fro

4ayor. 

after its

Counc' 

and sen

ber Oliver Daviil
5 -66 to the full

Annexation Committee met this afternoon

Council

Presenter:  Ch
July I"  meeting a
exception use to all
variance from the requ
Beeler Court.  This come

lot, Building
ea Board

eatio

missioner,  125 S.  Lafayette Blvd, South Bend — At the
one Appeals, where a petition was heard for a special
e for a batting and pitching facility in a LI district with
ng spaces to 16 spaces.  Property located at 4085 Meghan

this evening with a favorable recommendation. 

Petitioner: Mike Branch, 2099 E. Clear Lake Rd., Buchanan, MI — We are seeking a special
exception to allow for a state of the art indoor baseball facility at 4085 Meghan Beeler Court. 
The facility will feature automated pitching machines for baseball and softball, video analysis, 
and northern Indiana' s first baseball simulator.  The plan calls for six ( 6)  cages to be used for
hitting, pitching, and touching the screen. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

There being no one present wishing to speak to the Council either in favor of or in opposition to
this bill, Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt resolution 15 -66.  Councilmember

Karen White seconded the motion which carried and the Resolution was adopted by a roll call vote
of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

10

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 201

15 - 67

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA,  APPROVING A PETITION OF THE SOUTH

BEND BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS FOR THE PROPERTY LOCATED

AT 430 PARKOVASH AVE

WHEREAS,  Indiana Code Section 36 -7 -4- 918. 6,  requires the Common Council
to give notice pursuant to Indiana Code Section 5- 14- 1. 5 -5,  of its intention to consider
Petitions from the Board of zoning Appeals for approval or disapproval;  and

WHEREAS,  THE Common Council must take action within sixty ( 60)  days after

the Board of Zoning Appeals makes its recommendation to the Council;  and

WHEREAS,  the Common Council

is required to make a determination in writing

on such requests pursuant to Indiana Code Section 36 -7 -4- 918. 4,  and

WHEREAS,  the South Bend Board of Zoning Appeals has made a

recommendation,  pursuant to applicable state law. 

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE IT RESOLVED BY
OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA as follows: 

L OF THE CITY

SECTION I.  The Common Council has provi
from the Board of Zoning Appeals persona to In
requesting that a Special Exception be granted
Parkovash Ave in order to permit a child care cen er i

fthe

ode Sect
operty loc

ng on the Petition

14 -1. -

5, 

F2"  Distric . 

SECTION II.  Following a presentation
the Common Council hereby approve
Appeals, copy of which in on file in th

ner,  an

r proper public hearing, 

petiti
ffice o

he Sou

Clerk. 

d Board of Zoning

SECTION III.  The Common
that the proposed use will

cil of the C
furious to

of Sou

ubli

d,  Indiana,  hereby finds

alth,  safety,  comfort, 

community

ards, 

fence of g

fare: 

e prosper

with

a injurious to the public health,  safety, comfort, 

ommunity

or

proposed use

3.  Th

r property val
osed use

it is to

and the

4.  The pro

use

dard, 

enience or general welfare; 

adversely affect the use of the adjacent

of inju
herein; 
a consistent with the character of the district in which
uses authorized therein; 

mpatible with the recommendations of the City of

South Ben

ensive plan; 

SECTION IV.  Approval is subject to the Petitioner complying the reasonable conditions
established by the Board of Zoning Appeals which are on file in the Office of the City
Clerk. 

SECTION V.  The Resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption
by the Common Council and approval by the Mayor. 

Member of the Common Council

11

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

Councilmember Oliver Davis,  Chairperson, Zoning &  Annexation Committee met this afternoon
and send bill 15 -67 to the full Council favorably with written commitments. 

Presenter: Chuck Bulot, Building Commissioner,  125 S.  Lafayette Blvd, South Bend — At the
July 1st meeting at the Area Board of Zoning Appeals, this special exception was heard to allow a
child care center in a SF2 district and a variance from the required five ( 5)  parking spaces to two
2).  The property located at 430 Parkovash Ave, Portage Township zoned SF2.  This special
exception is sent to you with a favorable recommendation with written commitments of no more
than twelve ( 12)  children with none being older than five (5)  years of age.  The petition of
variance was granted subject to the special exception being approved. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public f
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

proponents and

There being no one present wishing to speak to the
this bill, Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to

written

Oliver Davis seconded the motion which

of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis

in

uvo

position to

ution 1

subject to the

1st.  2015.  Councilmember

by a roll call vote

PTION OF A DECLARATORY

AREAS WITHIN THE CITY

INDIANA,  COMMONLY KNOWN AS 824 N.  ST. 

END, 

INDIANA 46617 AS A RESIDENTIALLY

F A 5

FIVE —YEAR

FOR JEFFREY

Declaratory
for the purpose of tax

I of the City of South Bend,  Indiana,  has adopted a
areas within the City as Residentially Distressed Areas

WHEREAS, a

Resolution designated the area commonly known as: 

824 N.  St. Peter St., 

South Bend, IN 46617

and which is more particularly described as follows: 

THAT PART OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER, SECTION 1,  TOWNSHIP 37 NORTH, 

RANGE 1 EAST, PORTAGE TOWNSHIP, CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  ST. JOSEPH COUNTY, 

INDIANA WHICH IS DESCRIBED AS LOT " T' AS SHOWN ON THE PLAT OF " SORIN' S

FIRST ADDITION TO THE TOWN OF LOWELL, FIRST MINO SUBDIVISION" 

RECORDED MARCH 20TH,  2014 IN THE OFFICE OF THE ST. JOSEPH COUNTY, 

INDIANA RECORDED AS INSTRUMENT NO.  1406256

SUBJECT TO ALL LEGAL RIGHT -OF -WAYS, EASEMENTS, AND RESTRICTIONS OF

RECORD

be designated as a Residentially Distressed Area under the provisions of Indiana Code 6- 

1. 1 - 12. 1 et seq.,  and South Bend Municipal Code Sections 2 -76 et seq.,  and; 

12

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

WHEREAS,  notice of the adoption of a Declaratory Resolution and the public hearing

before the Council has been published pursuant to Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 2. 5;  and

WHEREAS,  the Council held a public hearing for

the purposes of hearing all

remonstrances and objections from interested persons;  and

WHEREAS,  the Council has determined that

the qualifications for a residentially

distressed area have been met. 

NOW, THEREFORE,  BE IT RESOLVED by the Common Council of the City of South

Bend, Indiana, as follows: 

February 10,  2003

owed 69

families, r

my one ( 1) 
mg accessory

are: 

1 - 24 and IC 6- 1. 1 - 25:  or

elling units

a area are not permanently occupied

cels in the area are vacant land;  or

01anirMicantnumbe

g

tuber

r of

a units within the area are: 

SECTION III.  The Common Council also hereby determines and finds the following: 

A.  That the description of the proposed redevelopment meets the applicable standards

B. 

C. 

for such development. 
That the estimate of the value of the redevelopment is reasonable for projects of this

nature; 

That the other benefits about which information was requested are benefits that can
be reasonably expected to result from the proposed described redevelopment; and

D.  That the totality of benefits is sufficient to justify the requested deduction,  all of

E. 

F. 

which satisfy the requirements of Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 3. 
The deduction will not be allowed unless the dwelling is rehabilitated to meet local
code standards for habitability. 
The deduction will not be allowed unless the dwelling rehabilitation is completed
within five ( 5)  calendar years from the date ofthe adoption ofthis Resolution by the
Common Council. 

13

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

SECTION IV.  The Common Council hereby confirms its Declaratory Resolution designating the
area described herein as a Residentially Distressed Area for the purposes of tax abatement.  Such
designation is for Real property tax abatement only and is limited to two ( 2)  calendar years from
the date of adoption of the Declaratory Resolution by the Common Council as shown by the
attachment pursuant to Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 17. 

SECTION V.  The Common Council hereby determines that the property owner is qualified for
and is granted a real property tax deduction for a period of five ( 5)  years as shown by the
attachment pursuant to Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 17,  and further determines that the petition
complies with Chapter 2,  Article 6,  of the Municipal Code of the City of South Bend and Indiana
Code 6 -1. 1 - 12. 1 et seq. 

SECTION VI.  This Resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption by the
Common Council and approval by the Mayor. 

the C40kon Council

Presenter: Brock Zeeb,  Department of Community
you is a residential real property tax abateme
year period are $ 15, 441.  The estimated to

2, 142.  The total taxes to be paid over th
discuss his residential home being bit, i

e ( 5) 
u ha

Councilmember Dr. Fred Ferl'  e

d the

oor— Before
tm
Theated over the five ( 5) 

the

ices

d oLd ) 

year period are

9.  Jeffery is here to
answer them. 

Petitioner: J
building a
been cl
three

would lik

This being t

opponents v

Councilmei

Bend— My wife and I will be

Stre
in an area that was pretty run down; the lots have
t of the Notre Dame housing program. We have
Went house and we need to build a larger one.  I

ublic Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
heard. 

There being no one present wishing to speak to the Council either in favor of or in opposition to
this bill, Councilmember Karen White made a motion to adopt resolution 15 -70.  Councilmember

Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried and the Resolution was adopted by a roll call vote
of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

15 - 71

A RESOLUTION CONFIRMING THE ADOPTION OF A DECLARATORY

RESOLUTION DESIGNATING CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE CITY

OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA,  COMMONLY KNOWN AS THE

SOUTHEAST CORNER OF ADAMS RD AND DYLAN DR,  SOUTH BEND, 

IN 46628 AS AN ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA FOR

PURPOSES OF AN EIGHT ( 8)  YEAR REAL PROPERTY TAX

ABATEMENT FOR GLC PORTAGE PRAIRIE,  LLC

WHEREAS,  the Common Council of the City of South Bend,  Indiana,  has adopted a
Declaratory Resolution designating certain areas within the City as Economic Revitalization Areas
for the purpose of tax abatement consideration;  and

14

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

WHEREAS, a Declaratory Resolution designated the area commonly known as Southeast
corner of Adams Rd and Dylan Dr, South Bend, IN 46628 and which is more particularly described
as follows: 

Nw 1/ 4 Sec 17 -38 -2E Ex Irr Tract Nw Cor & Ex 1. 717 Ac to State &  Ex 7 Ac +- for N/ S Rd
Ex 10. 5 Ac +- Parcel 800'  N of S Line &  E of N/ S Rd 06/07 Split to 014601 &  014602
16442CWD 1 - 19 -06 Annxd 06 -07 per Ord # 9587 -05 Split off 10. 073 ac 07 -08 for Ptg
Prairie Minor pt of Lot 1&  09/ 10 7. 413ac to Ptg Prairie Minor # 2 &  10/ 11 8. 15 ac to Ptg
Prairie Minor #3

and which has Key Number 025- 1009 -0146 be designated as an Economic Revitalization Area; 

and

WHEREAS,  notice of the adoption of a Declaratory Resolution and the public hearing

before the Council has been published pursuant to Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 2. 5;  and

WHEREAS,  the Council held a public hearing for

the purposes of hearing all

remonstrances and objections from interested persons and

Ak

WHEREAS,  the Council
revitalization area have been met. 

NOW, THEREFORE,  BE IT RESOLVED

Bend, Indiana, as follows: 

SECTION I.  The Common Council
area described herein as an Economic
designation is for Real Property tax a
the date of adoption of the Declaratoqj

economic

of South

Resolution designating the
es of tax abatement.  Such

2)  calendar years from

SECTION II.  The Common
and is granted a real proper

attachment oundfiffifibibludia

iereby det
auction fo

x- 1. 1-  12. 1 - 1

ines th

i (

property owner is qualified for
8)  eight years as shown by the
er determines that the petition,  the

of I

and

Common

etik6tion er and the City of South Bend, and the Statement

the Municipal Code of the City of South Bend

in full force and effect from and after its adoption by the
Mayor. 

Member of the Common Council

Presenter: Brock Zeeb, Department of Community Investment, Offices on the 14"  floor — Before
you is a closed construction of a 200,000 sq.  ft. spec building.  You will recall approving that
with a favorable recommendation to the Redevelopment Commission in the last meeting.  This is
the continued tax abatement and confirming resolution for that same project.  They propose to
build a $ 7 million new building with total taxes to be created over the eight ( 8)  year period of

1, 882,000.  Estimated taxes to be abated over the eight (8)  year period will be $ 724,000.  Total
taxes to be paid over the eight ( 8)  year period is $ 1, 157, 000.  Brock Zeeb referred to a diagram, 
this is the breakdown of how that project will be paid back to the city.  If it took the first two ( 2) 
payments or the first (2)  years where the building set vacant it would be a seven ( 7)  year return
on investment.  The petitioner is here to speak on the project if you have any questions. 

Petitioner: Richard Deal, Barnes &  Thornburg 100 N. Michigan St.,  South Bend— I am pleased
to be joined with Jeff Smoke,  the Director of Development of Great Lake Capital.  Just to give
you a brief overview of this project, as the Council will recall this is a confirming resolution for a

15

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

request for an eight ( 8)  year tax abatement.  This relates to an investment in a brand new spec
bulk distribution facility, to be built on 25 acres that sits on the Southeast corner ofDylan Drive
and Adams Road.  This is an effort to have a spec building, which is a move in ready facility to
help entice and enhance the ability to attract businesses to the area.  The investment will exceed

7 million and will result in employment and hopefully depending on the tenancy, greater

numbers than expected.  We are initially projecting in the first couple years at least 20 new full
time jobs with a payroll of at least $ 750,000.  We appreciate your consideration and will answer
any questions that you may have. 

This being the time heretofore set for the
opponents were given an opportunito 1

proponents and

There being no one present
this bill, Councilmember G

Karen A

of seven

in favor of or in opposition to

resolution 15 -71.  Councilmember

ion was adopted by a roll call vote

C

ING THE ADOPTION OF A DECLARATORY

ESIG

NG CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE CITY

D, 

INDIANA,  COMMONLY KNOWN AS 5231 DYLAN

BEND IN 46628 AS AN ECONOMIC

ON AREA FOR PURPOSES OF A SEVEN (

7)  YEAR

Y TAX ABATEMENT FOR AMERIPLEX SUPERIOR

OF SOUT

DRIVE S

9EVITAL

LP

WHEREAS,  the Co

on Council of the City of South Bend,  Indiana,  has adopted a
Declaratory Resolution designating certain areas within the City as Economic Revitalization Areas
for the purpose of tax abatement consideration;  and

WHEREAS,  a Declaratory Resolution designated the area commonly known as 5231

Dylan Drive, South Bend, IN 46628 and which is more particularly described as follows: 

Lot 3 Portage Prairie Minor #5

and which has Key Number 025- 1009 - 014605 be designated as an Economic Revitalization Area; 
and

WHEREAS,  notice of the adoption of a Declaratory Resolution and the public hearing

before the Council has been published pursuant to Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 2. 5;  and

WHEREAS,  the Council held a public hearing for

the purposes of hearing all

remonstrances and objections from interested persons;  and

16

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

WHEREAS,  the Council has determined that

the qualifications for an economic

revitalization area have been met. 

NOW, THEREFORE,  BE IT RESOLVED by the Common Council of the City of South

Bend, Indiana, as follows: 

SECTION I.  The Common Council hereby confirms its Declaratory Resolution designating the
area described herein as an Economic Revitalization Area for the purposes of tax abatement.  Such
designation is for Real Property tax abatement only and is limited to two (2)  calendar years from
the date of adoption of the Declaratory Resolution by the Common Council. 

SECTION II.  The Common Council hereby determines that the property owner is qualified for
and is granted a real property tax deduction for a period of (7)  years as shown by the attachment
pursuant to Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 17 and further determines that the petition, the Memorandum
of Agreement between the Petitioner and the City of South Bend,  and the Statement of Benefits
comply with Chapter 2,  Article 6,  of the Municipal Code of the City of South Bend and Indiana
Code 6- 1. 1 - 12 et seq. 

SECTION III.  This Resolution shall be in full
Common Council and approved by the Mayor. 

after its adoption by the

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, C
afternoon and send bill 15 -72 to

Council

met this

27S

Petitioner: Lynette
existing building for
company outside of this s
they acquired into their existing building.  The existing building was not large enough so the
expansion was warranted. 

n St.,  South Bend —The project is an expansion of an

t contacted us earlier this year about a new acquisition of a

ey wish to bring the distribution of that particular company that

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

There being no one present wishing to speak to the Council either in favor of or in opposition to
this bill, Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt resolution 15 -72.  Councilmember

Valerie Schey seconded the motion which carried and the Resolution was adopted by a roll call
vote of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

15 - 73

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND DESIGNATING A CERTAIN AREA WITHIN THE CITY

OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA,  COMMONLY KNOWN AS 810 N ST

PETER ST., 

SOUTH BEND, 

IN 46617 AS A RESIDENTIALLY

DISTRESSED AREA FOR PURPOSES OF A ( 5)  FIVE -YEAR

17

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT FOR THOMAS AND

LISA LOUGHRAN

WHEREAS, a Statement of Benefits and a petition for residential real property tax

abatement have been submitted to and filed with the City Clerk for consideration by the
Common Council of the City of South Bend, Indiana, requesting that the area commonly known
as 810 N. St.  Peter St.,  South Bend, Indiana 46617 and which is more particularly described as
follows: 

THAT PART OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER, SECTION 1,  TOWNSHIP 37 NORTH, 

RANGE 1 EAST, PORTAGE TOWNSHIP, CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  ST. JOSEPH COUNTY, 

INDIANA BEING A RE- SUBDIVISION OF PART OF LOTS 20,  21,  22 AND 23 OF

SORIN' S FIRST ADDITION TO THE TOWN OF LOWELL RECORDED MARCH 20TH, 

2014 IN THE OFFICE OF THE ST. JOSEPH COUNTY, INDIANA RECORDED AS

INSTRUMENT NO.  1406256

SUBJECT TO ALL LEGAL RIGHT -OF -WAYS, EASEMENTS, AND RESTRICTIONS OF

RECORD

ldk

be designated as a Residentially Dis
I et seq.,  and South Bend Municipal

of Indiana Code 6- 

WHEREAS, the Department of Community 1
prepared a report with information sufficient for the
qualifies as a Residentially Distressed Area under. 
Bend Municipal Code Sections 2 -76,  et seq., AMOft

WHEREAS, the Community
said report and recommended to tA

gation and

6- 1. 1 - 12. 

at the area
and South
maps and plats showing the
Is required by law; and

n on Council has reviewed
qualifies as a Residentially

Council of the City of South

ines and finds that the petition for real property
meet the requirements of Indiana Code 6 -1. 1- 

area meets one of the

which was passed on

The area is comprised of parcels that are either unimproved or contain only one ( 1) 
or two (2)  family dwellings designed for up to four (4)  families, including accessory
buildings for those dwellings;  or

Any dwellings in the area are not permanently occupied and are: 
i. 
ii.  evidencing significant building deficiencies;  or

the subject of an order issued under IC 36 -7 -9;  or

have been sold and not redeemed under IC 6- 1. 1 - 24 and IC 6- 1. 1 - 25;  or

Parcels of property in the area: 
i. 
ii.  are owned by a unit of local government; or
A significant number of dwelling units within the area are not permanently
occupied or a significant number of parcels in the area are vacant land; or
A significant number of dwelling units within the area are: 
i. 
ii.  evidencing significant building deficiencies;  or
The area has experienced a net loss in the number of dwelling units, as documented

the subject of an order issued under IC 36 -7 -9;  or

A

B

C. 

D. 

E. 

F. 

Im

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

by census information,  local building and demolition permits,  or certificates of
occupancy,  or the areas are owned by Indiana or the United States;  or, 
The area ( plus any areas previously designated under this subsection)  will not
exceed ten percent ( 10 %)  of the total area within the Council' s jurisdiction. 

G. 

SECTION III.  The Common Council also hereby determines and finds the following: 

A. 

That the description of the proposed redevelopment meets the applicable standards

under Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 3

SECTION V.  The Common Council
Community Investment Committee
Distressed Area and hereby adopts
Area for purposes ofreal prop

t th

y acce

rea he

olution d

ating

abatement. 

report

ecommendation of the
ed be designated as a Residentially
ea as a Residentially Distressed

SECTION V

calendar y

ation

esidentially

ed Area shall be limited to two ( 2) 

the a

n of this Resolution by the Common Council. 

SECT

11.  The Commo

cil he

and is gr

a real property

educti

etermines that the property owner is qualified for
r a period of five ( 5)  years as shown by the

attachment n

t to Indiana C -

1. 1-  12. 1 - 17. 

SECTION VIII. 
this Declaratory Res
Code 5 -3 - 1 and Indian
hearing before the Commo

mmon
for

it directs the City Clerk to cause notice of the adoption of
roperty Tax Abatement to be published pursuant to Indiana
1. 1-  12. 1 - 2. 5,  said publication providing notice of the public

ncil on the proposed confirming of said declaration. 

SECTION IX.  Pursuant to Indiana Code 6 -1. 1-  12. 1 - 2,  the rehabilitation must meet all local code
standards for habitability as a specific condition of having such property designated as a
residentially distressed area. 

SECTION X.  This Resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption by the
Common Council and approval by the Mayor. 

Member of the Common Council

19

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chairperson, Community Investment Committee met this
afternoon and send bill 15 -73 to the full Council favorably. 

Presenter: Brock Zeeb, Department of Community Investment, Offices on the 14"  floor — Before
you is a residential tax abatement.  The estimated construction cost to the house will be

325, 000.  The estimated taxes to be created the five ( 5)  year period are $ 16, 770.  The estimated

taxes to be abated over the five ( 5)  year period will be $ 1, 893.  Total taxes to be paid over the
five ( 5)  year period will be $ 14, 877.  Again this is on St. Peter' s Street near the other tax
abatement.  The petitioner is here to answer any questions about the new construction that you
may have. 

Petitioner: Tom Loughran,  52314 Tammy Drive, Granger — My wife and I currently reside in
Granger and are doing our damdest to move to South Bend, Indiana.  We purchased a lot at 810
N. St. Peters as part of the Notre Dame housing program with the intent to build a house on that
vacant lot. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

There being no one present wishing to speak to
this bill, Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a n

Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which ca

vote of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

vor of or in opposition to

n 15 -73.  Councilmember

adopted by a roll call

OF THE COMMON

431 ADIMSSING

r_ :  If .Y811l  y r m. rG1 a

A

CALL

IN DOC

S wxo WISIM
THE BOARD

T 2431 ADL

0

Indiana High School Alq

charged with encouraging

of the City of South Bend,  Indiana recognizes that the

Lion,  Inc, ( IHSAA)  was first organized in 1903,  and is

wholesome amateur athletics"  by: 

Regulating, supervising and administering interschool athletic activities;  and
Cooperating with all agencies vitally concerned with the health and educational welfare
of secondary school students;  and
Determining qualifications of individual contestants,  coaches and officials;  and
Providing written communications to facilitate athletic relations among member
schools;  and

Establishing standards for eligibility, competition and sportsmanship while providing

protection against exploitation of schools and students;  and

the Common Council further recognizes that any high school in Indiana,  as well
as any junior high school offering 9"  grade,  whether such school is public, private,  institutional or
parochial,  if accredited by the Indiana Department of Education, may become a member of the
IHSAA; and

20

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

the IHSAA is governed by a 19- member Board of Directors who are elected by
member school principals from three ( 3)  IHSAA legislative districts;  who also comprise the

IHSAA Executive Committee who meet on a monthly basis to organize &  direct state tournaments
and meets;  to interpret By -Laws;  and to determine penalties for rule violations; and

the 2015 -2016 IHSAA By -Laws &  Articles of Incorporation is a very detailed
document which notes that " one of the purposes of the IHSAA is to assure that every student - 
athlete has a fair opportunity to compete "; and

at the City of South Bend 2016 Budget Kickoff held at the Century Center on

May 28,  2015, Council Member Karen L. White, Personnel and Finance Committee Chairperson, 
talked about " What makes a great city ".  She highlighted many key factors such as that " cities are
about people and the quality of life for its citizens "; that " a truly great city needs to be an appealing
place to live.  It needs to attract and retain a large pool of local, national and international talent "; 

and that " strong neighborhoods make strong cities"  with educational opportunities and standards
being a component part; and

Resolution Addressing Interscholastic Athletics Policy
Page 2

the South Bend Community

currently considering whether to lower the academic
and high school student athletes which were
scheduled to be voted upon by the Board

the SBCSC' s

athletes in grades 6 through 12, 
permit the following students td

I lm grade
12s'  grade

grade point average

ade point average
de point average

Trustees is

school

five ( 5)  years ago,  and is

t:  and

iint average for all student- 

by the school board would

with students

guidelines being

o not meet the

particil:  Such students are tutored and show improvement;  and

ct' s requirement but who would qualify under the IHSAA

the Co

it believes that everyone has a stake and a role in continuing
Indiana, into a great city, which requires setting the bar high and
to build the City of South
focusing on helping students,  and especially student - athletes meet and exceed high expectations; 

and

the Common Council further believes that the proposed policy fails to meet the

grade in promoting the youth of our community to be the best that they can be, whether it be in the
classroom or in the athletic arenas or athletic fields. 

Section I.  The South Bend Common Council believes that much more dialogue,  collaboration, 
and outreach needs to take place before the South Bend Community School Corporation Board of
Trustees takes action to proceed ahead on August 3,  2015 —  which is just a few days before the

21

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

first day of school [ August 18"' 1,  on any proposed changes to the current interscholastic athletic
policy. 

Section II. The Common Council further believes that a policy of this nature deserves enhanced
public input and the greatest degree of transparency possible. 

Section III.  The Common Council calls upon the South Bend Community School Corporation to
have a series of community outreach meetings, at
locations throughout the City, so that as many
members of the public as possible have the opportunity to have their voice heard. 

Resolution Addressing Interscholastic Athletics Policy
Page 3

Section IV.  This Resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption by the
Common Council and approval by the Mayor. 

at Large

e- President

Member

5

VIIlce oI me l;lty k- ICM

rete tsuutgteg, rviayor or ;! oum trend

Councilmember Karen White, Chairperson, Community Relation Committee met this afternoon
and send bill 15 -74 to the full Council favorably. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis returned to the meeting) 

Presenters:  Councilmember Davis, Jr &  Councilmember Schey:  Henry Davis Jr, 5117 Idlewood
Drive, South Bend— Councilmember Henry Davis Jr. presented Resolution 15 -74 to the full
Council.  Councilmember Valerie Schey,  1314 E. Wayne St. North, South Bend— I shared with
the committee earlier, however for public record Councilmember Henry Davis Jr. brought this
issue to our attention.  I agreed that it is an important issue,  so I joined as a sponsor.  I know
when we moved here ten ( 10)  years ago,  one of the things we looked at when moving to a new

22

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

This

given an

Those

speak in

e bill, proponents and

William Sniadec

ool Board

here tonight is to en

e the

her, 215 S.  St. Joseph,  South Bend — The only reason I am
rt of this resolution.  Five ( 5)  years ago,  2.0 was presented, 

it went through a full co

er a year of study.  It went through the committee and working
st possibility for all of our kids.  A lot of things the committee is
sessions to come up with
proposing is already our policy but is not enforced by our administration.  The first year we did
the study tables it went great.  It was when study tables were eliminated which I was unaware, is
when things started to go downhill.  Make it a resolution for 24 -31 and like another policy 24 -30
was for all extra - curricular activities to make grades as we couldn' t discriminate against just

football players.  Similar to having a drivers'  license, it is a privilege but not a right.  You need to
pass a test to drive, this is the same way it should be for playing sports.  I was trying to come up
with a compromise,  I think I did today. 
I would like to encourage everyone today,  this is a
community problem.  My Facebook out of 197 likes were against lowering our standards.  A lot
of news stations were all similar on their post.  After my article,  I got at least 40 emails, over 100
calls that everyone was against
lowering our standards.  What I propose is to keep our 2.0
throughout 0-12th grade and if you are under 2.0 you have to go to study tables.  As long as you
are in study tables and showing improvements you should be allowed to play ball. 

Jessie Davis, P. O.  Box 10205,  South Bend, IN — I' m sure we all remember the catch phrase that

we saw all over television, " the mind is a terrible thing to waste;"  that stands so true.  If you relax

23

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

this requirement that you are not made to do something,  it doesn' t get done.  If we let them go
there in high school what happens if they want to go to college?  We need to push them, we need
to challenge them.  I have a twenty year old, he went to Elkhart and their school system was not
as challenging as ours.  In kindergarten and first grade we were told that he was slow or possibly
needed special education.  If you test him now he will probably be at a genius level.  He can write
computer programs;  the problem was that he was bored.  He wasn' t being challenged,  he was
bored.  When he got higher in his later education years,  they put him in advanced classes;  he
whizzed through those, but he was being challenged and he excelled a lot.  I think you unanimously
need to vote this through.  I for one will be at the School Board meeting when they hear this. 

For

ring

end — 

support the resolution to

went

I gradua

was one semester short

see

a war o

ifficult o

not getting
like,  so wha

scho

numb

ds tha

t to high sch

down

he state house making it
orations.  But the answer on our

tudents that we like,  we' re not

g to do is make it easier for you to
who played sports just as I did, who

ninimal

n na

now in the In

Depa

in my mid - thirties at least ten ( 10)  who are serving
of Corrections,  due to poor decisions that come in

get here. 

skated b

i the, " I' m just

we' re more

d about what v

corporation.  I

life to get better, 

e as a Irais

to

to slid

mentality.  Especially when we send a message
n do on the basketball court or the football field as a school

ity have to understand that if we want all of our quality of
standards.  We have to make these kids at 6th grade,  at 8th

grade,  at 10th grade kn

t

in this life, your boss is no

are not all going to college, but if you want to make anything
wer the standards to let you get by.  They are going to expect
you to meet the standard.  I am a Pittsburgh Steelers fan, huge sports fan.  As Mike Tomlin always

says, " the standard is the standard."  I think that needs to stay the same for the school corporations, 
let " the standard be the standard." 

Dan Mullas,  632 S.  28"  Street,  South Bend — My view on this situation is this is about the kids; 
take the politics out of it.  In my opinion, I think they should be shooting for a 3. 0 and above.  If
they don' t get the 3. 0 GPA, a 2. 8 GPA or 2.9 GPA will show that at least they' re trying.  Where I
went to school at, I had an amazing football coach.  He told me 10%  of the game is physical and
90%  of the game is mental.  I know the school says 2. 5 GPA but I want to see a 3. 0 GPA or you' re

not playing.  I made the honor roll every one of my years there.  In the beginning,  I was doing it
for my parents and my coach, then I realized through time I was doing it for my son.  My son starts
playing football this year for Jefferson.  When I saw the 1. 5 GPA, I told him if you' re not at a 3. 0
GPA or close you' re not playing.  We need to teach our kids to want more.  I' ve gone to job
interviews where people can' t read a tape measurer or pass basic math tests.  If you are telling kids
that 1. 5 GPA is good enough to play ball, then you will have a generation that will think 1. 5 is

24

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

good enough to get by.  You need to take all the politics out and focus on them, which is why this
resolution makes perfect sense to get them in the spot they need to be for our fixture. 

Councilmember Karen White — I would like to say that the standards should be high and that we
should not reduce the standards.  Children will reach and respond to high expectations.  I think this

is a great opportunity for the Council to enter into a conversation and dialogue with the School
Board of Trustees to work together to move forward with the very best for our children and
ultimately for the community as a whole. 

ould just say I' ll support the
lease take a look at the resolution

what it is,  just a title.  The actual

sections 1,  2,  and 3 of the resolution, which simply

consider finding ways to get
resolution.  Again,  I would lil

language it

resolutio

states

certainl

want the boaflM

pnort of that.  AA

Mr. Sniade

on' t disagree

these kids in

to make grades.  I

I do support the cha

study hall

common council, we are

a longer look at this. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis — As a South Bend School Social Worker, I am a part of the support
structure for whatever compromises voted on by the South Bend School Board of Trustees.  I am
going to have to abstain from this issue,  as my job as a social worker is to work with the structure
any way.  I' ll take my lead from whatever happens.  Thank you. 

Councilmember Dr.  David Varner — First of all I hope that
this is accepted by the School
Corporation by the matter in which it is intended.  I don' t think this is meant to be telling them
what to do,  but offering an opinion of what other people think could be done.  It' s a job I never
wanted,  so I hesitated to stick my nose in it.  On the other hand,  I' ve never been a part of an
organization that bettered themselves by lowering their standards.  We are arguing now how low
is low, but the fact is that you set a standard and you ask people to live by it to the extent that you
can get people to reach that goal.  I think it is a good thing, it doesn' t'  have to be just grades,  it can
be attendance or a number of things.  From my perspective,  as Gavin said there is nothing in here

25

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

legal, nothing is binding it' s simply a statement put together in general terms.  In my perspective
you set standards and you hold them to it and you will end up with a better finished product.  If
you lower standards,  then next year we will be lowering standards again and lower them again. 
Some of my friends are members of the School Board, I hope they are not offended by this;  it' s
not meant to be offensive but encouraging. 

I

going tol
If they gra
within the city
and we need to

Dame

can' t we say this is what your goal is;  why not? 
ith these standards they can get to our flagship universities
am in support of this.  The conversation needs to continue

I would like to add a couple of thoughts.  In 2009, the Council

Councilmember Henry — 
within the same sub -com tee passed an ordinance authored by me to continue ongoing
conversations with the school corporation to offer them support.  We obviously know that without
a healthy school system the city itself cannot develop.  Another part of the conversation, was that
the infrastructures in which the schools sit on are owned by the city the curbs, sidewalk area, sewer, 
water...  So if there is any opportunity that we can help them with the infrastructure to be taken
care of whether plowing or paving the roadway the city can participate with those discussions as
well.  One thing I want to mention, the same type of grown- headed policy that this is helped to
land one ( 1)  million African- American men in prison to current day.  We have a social justice
problem here in America.  It begins and ends,  then begins again with the educational opportunities

in the different communities whether they are making the grade are not.  In my time from being a
student athlete from 3'  grade to my senior year in College,  it was an expectation that you knew
this and this is how you get it done.  If you didn' t get it done,  you didn' t get to participate.  I

understand that other people have different challenges,  whether family are some other issues. 
However, if we do not press up on our children that they need to make the mark and make sure the
support mechanism are readily available, we are not only failing our kids, we are failing our society

26

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

and it' s going to end up being generational.  I get what you' re saying Mr. Ferlic.  What I can tell
you is that some of my best friends ended up in prison because they refused to go to school, they
refused to make the grades because they frowned upon it.  If we don' t press upon these children, 
especially the minorities, as this is where it comes from, that they are required to make the grades
that or they will have prisons waiting for them or plots out in the field in the local cemetery.  That
is our reality.  If we do nothing than we are failing them,  they are not failing us.  We are our
children' s fixture.  I digress. 

in opposition to this bills, 
There being no one present wishing to speak to the Council
Councilmember Mr.  Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt resolution 15 -74.  Councilmember

Karen White seconded the motion which carried and the Resolution was adopted by a roll call vote
of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

BILLS - FIRST READING

AND REQUESTING A

AT

4325

S.  MIC

COUNCILMANIC DIS

INDIANA

This bill had first reading.  Councilmember
Area Plan.  Councilmember Mr. Gavin Fer

of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

ZONING ORDINANCE

PROPERTY LOCATED

SEND, 

IN 46614, 

OF SQUTH BEND, 

to refer this bill to the
carried by a voice vote

REPORTS

BILL NO. 
UNIT DJA

So moved b

motion which

Councilmember Ga
Committee for August
carried by a voice vote

M RIRMA M11164LrffUwwuN: 

nd r

ted a motion to accept the substitute bill 29 -15. 

i Ferlic.  Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded the
eight ( 8)  ayes. 

motion to refer bill 29 -15 to Zoning &  Annexation
iuncilmember Oliver Davis seconded the motion which

Councilmember Henry Davis, Jr., when I was looking at the two tax abatements particularly with
15 -71,  I don' t know when or how this will be structured during budget sessions,  but I would
really like to know where we' re making out at;  with upping close to a million dollars in city
investment and $8 million in private investment.  If you are only getting 20 jobs out of $750,000
payroll that equates to roughly $38, 000 /yr. and everyone is not going to make the same amount. 
My thought is how do we spend that type of money and come up with that wage for the year. 
That is a huge sacrifice on someone' s end.  I am interested in the jobs that are coming in and
how much money each job is going to carry.  Are these investments ones that we really need or
is it just a means to an end?  I' m not really sold that these investments will help turn around our
economic situation.  This one looked like a sweet -heart deal even with the fact that we have to
pay a lease out,  if it' s not filled in two (2)  years;  I don' t get that.  That' s neither here nor there, I
am in support of it; I voted for it.  I have been really critical about our tax abatement policies and
how they actually help the city of South Bend. 

NEW BUSINESS

27

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

Councilmember Oliver Davis I will be sending updates from Rim Village Association and
departments.  I met with Mayor Pete last week about improvements to the U. S.  23 corridor; as
many people come to South Bend on U. S.  23.  Thank you again, Gavin, as I got an update today
regarding the curbs and sidewalks from the Prairie Apartments to the fire station.  Since currently
they don' t have sidewalks.  They also need lighting in that area,  as there is over 1, 000 people
over there.  Along with other things that need to be developed.  Over the next few weeks you
will be receiving an email in regards to putting a resolutions together. 

PRIVILEGE OF THE FLOOR

n' t fill all of our openings.  When you live in one of the

o officers a shift, that is not enough to handle the call volume, 

large police department, 
busiest call grids and only
let alone get to know neighborhoods or problem areas.  We need general infrastructure
improvements. It is nice to see improvements on Western Ave.  Like Mr. Brown said, I am afraid
that it will end up like Lincoln Way West, where traffic is bottle - necked, where people make
dangerous moves to pass busy streets and hope that you get across without hitting anyone.  There
is talk about tearing down homes in vacant areas by LaSalle Park to build soccer fields.  First, I
would not like to see anyone move from their home, and second it is not as vacant as the Mayor
and his office makes it out to seem.  They are still putting in neighbors there.  If there is one
thing that we really need on the west side is a dog park, a social gathering place. 

Sharon Banicki — 3822 W. Ford St.,  South Bend — I just want to give the council something to
think about.  We are throwing money into speculation buildings, into smart streets that we hope
will bring money to our city.  I would like each and every one of you to take some time and see
where you think the city is going.  What is your vision for the next 10, 20, 30 years?  What do
you think South Bend is going to be?  Mishawaka by default ended up being a retail mecca, at
the same time they are pulling all the healthcare.  I' m not sure how many of you know this but
not only did we lose the VA Center this week, which is the white elephant in this room, but
Michiana Hematology &  Oncology pulled all their offices, equipment and all to Mishawaka.  We

R] 

REGULAR MEETING

JULY 27, 2015

as the citizens deserve to know, we have a right to know.  We have Ignition Park that is ready to
ignite,  ignite into what?  You moved a building from Notre Dame to out there.  You haven' t
created any new jobs, you just moved them.  I like to address the fact that back in March, I filled
out a privilege of the floor and I never heard back from it, asking if all of last year' s meeting
minutes, that aren' t available, with resolutions and laws passed are they legal given the fact that
the meeting minutes didn' t back them up.  This year' s meeting minutes if you go back and read
them, they are paraphrased which is fine, as long as they get the right point across.  I know
reading from what I said it is not what I said up here.  I also discovered since I wasn' t here for a
while if I don' t have cable or I don' t have dish that I can' t sit at home and watch these meetings. 
You are doing a great disservice for majority of your people that don' t have internet access.  By
the way as a parting thought, the meeting you aired tonight was not the meeting that was shown
tonight.  You showed the wrong meeting. 

ADJOURNMENT
There being no further business to come before the

Tim Sc'WWourned the

osident

29

