Bryce Badura

1. Evidence that you have checked in some code into your repository for your project:
I created a repository and checked in the "graphtry.py" code to it, along with the csv file it needs to function. The files are checked in to a folder labeled "bryce". The repository can be looked at: https://github.com/prathmj/ds-open-data-proj

2. Documentation:

a. Timelog:
3/10/2017 19:30 - 21:00: Explored the depth of information available on the South Bend open data website, as Prathm has previously done work with South Bend, but I had not. It exposed me to the level of data that we could use to better connect with the community or model to provide insight to the city of South Bend.
3/11/2017 8:00 - 9:00:   Explored the functionality and capabilities of matplotlib that we might use in displaying information. This is a good "program" for grpahing since it uses CSV which are prominent of the South Bend open data site.
3/20/2017 22:00 - 23:00: Reviewed some of the material the Prathm recommended on governemnt, tech, and open data.
3/21/2017 21:40 - 22:30: Wrote the program that is included with this report, graphtry.py. The majority of this programming time was downloading PIP and then downloading the graphing library.

b. How graphtry.py works internally:
	The graphtry.py program explores the elementary capabilities of the matplotlib library. To begin, we used a csv filefor the coordinates that we want to plot. Then, we make our python file and import the neccesary libraries. We then use the csv library to create the csv_reader object. We make an array and then make a for loop that traverses through csv_reader and appends it to the array (we also keep track of max and min). Then we sort this array and then separate the values into x and y arrays. We then create a figure object, set our axes, labels, limits, and colors, and then create the plot and save it as "test.png"

3. "Show us what you learned."
	While my counterparts spend alot of time understanding the importance of the field in which we are doing our project, I spent the majority of my time learning more about python and the various libraries that are available to use. I learned how to use the Python installer (PIP) and used this to download the matplotlib library. I then learned how to use some of the pyplot functions to create a simple graph (which can be found as a png file in the github repository for our final projects).
	I did also spend a good deal of time learning more about the open data that is available for us to use and manipulate to provide citizens and local government with better representations and ways to understand this raw data. I had a general idea of what we might be able to do, but now I feel confident that we can use the data for public good (for example, using data on school districts to better allocate money and resources)
