REPORT OF SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

TO THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND: 

THE SUB - COMMITTEE HAS INSPECTED THE MINUTES OF THE

January 23, 2017

MEETING OF THE COUNCIL AND FOUND THEM TO BE CORRECT. 

THEREFORE, WE RECOMMEND THE SAME BE APPROVED: 

TI

T

ARNER

APPROVED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL ON: 

February 13,  2017

ATTEST: 

KA EMAH FO LE ,  CITY CLERK

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend, Indiana met in the
Council Chambers of the County -City Building on Monday January 23rd, 2017 at 7: 00 p.m. The
meeting was called to order by Council President Tim Scott and the Invocation was given by
Reverend Chip Roush, Minister at First Unitarian Church of South Bend and Pledge to the Flag

was given. 

ROLL CALL

COUNCIL MEMBERS: 

Tim Scott
Regina Williams- Preston
Randy Kelly
Jo M.  Broden
Dr. David Varner
Oliver J.  Davis
John Voorde
Gavin Ferlic

ABSENT: 

1St District, President
211 District

3rd District
4th District

5th District
6th District, Vice President

At -Large
At- Large,  Chairperson Committee of the Whole

Karen L. White

At -Large

OTHERS PRESENT: 

Kareemah Fowler

Jennifer Coffman
Alkeyna Aldridge
Graham Sparks
Aladean DeRose

Adriana Rodriguez

City Clerk
Chief Deputy Clerk
Deputy Clerk
City Clerk Secretary
Interim Council Attorney
Legal Research Assistant

REPORT FROM THE SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion that the minutes of the January 9th,  2017 meeting of
the Council be accepted and placed on file. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the
motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

SPECIAL BUSINESS

Councilmember Tim Scott announced that Bill No.  66 -16,  regarding water rates, would be

continued. 

REPORTS OF CITY OFFICES

Representing the City Administration: 

James Mueller, Chief of Staff

Suzanna Fritzberg, Deputy Chief of Staff

RESOLVE INTO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

At 7: 05 p.m. Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to resolve into the Committee of the
Whole. Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

8)  ayes. Councilmember Gavin Ferlic,  Chairperson, presiding. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic explained the procedures to be followed for tonight' s meeting in
accordance with Article 1,  Section 2 -11 of the South Bend Municipal Code. 

PUBLIC HEARINGS

77 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE

AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR

PROPERTY LOCATED AT 3720 LINCOLNWAY

WEST, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO.  2 IN

THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to accept Substitute Bill No.  77 -16.  Councilmember
Tim Scott seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis,  Chair of the Zoning and Annexation Committee, reported that
they met this afternoon and send this bill forward with no recommendation. 

Angela Smith, Area Plan Commission, with offices on the l I'  Floor of the County -City
Building, served as presenter of this bill. Ms. Smith stated that the property owner is seeking to
rezone the parcel in question from Single - Family to MU, Mixed -Use. There is a single - family
home zoned SF2,  Single - Family and Two (2)- Family. There is also a local business zoned LB, 
Local Business.  To the east is a restaurant zoned LB, Local Business.  To the south are single - 
family homes zoned SF I.  To the west is a commercial business zoned GB,  General Business. 
Ms. Smith explained that the site currently contains a single - family home and some trees and
vegetation. Ms.  Smith at this point presented to the Council and public an image of the business
to the west of the site.  She stated that the current site plan occupies approximately two (2)  acres
with a 9, 100 square foot retail store with a corner entrance and at least fifty percent ( 50 %) of the
building fagade located within the maximum setback allowed for the Mixed -Use District. She
stated that the proposed parking in this configuration would be to the west and they would
comply with all the landscape requirements that are required by the City of South Bend. The
Comprehensive Plan for the West Side Main Streets,  adopted in 2015,  calls for a development at
the Sheridan node. Ms.  Smith stated,  That is commercial but with an urban character on the
building' s front -lined streets and parking located to the rear, and it serves as a transition to the
Single - Family residential zone further to the east.  She stated,  This comes to you from the Area
Plan Commission with a favorable recommendation. 

John Wojtila, Zaremba Group LLC, 14600 Detroit Avenue, Cleveland, OH, served on behalf of
the petitioner of this bill. Mr. Wojtila stated, Following the committee meeting, we did meet with
the adjacent property to our east, which is Volcano Restaurant. After that, they had time to
deliberate prior to this meeting. Mr. Wojtila presented to the Council and public an image of the
site plan. He stated, One of the plans that we had talked about was shifting the building towards
the [ unintelligible].  They are not so much in agreement with this plan —this is what we created
between the previous committee meeting and tonight. They would prefer to see the building back
further away from the road to increase the visibility even more than what is shown on this plan. 
Again, this is something different than what you saw this afternoon, but it' s something that the
Volcano Restaurant would like to see.  Mr. Wojtila walked over to the projector screen to
demonstrate to the Council and public the change in the building' s exact location on the site. He
stated, Previously, the building was in this area here. They would prefer to keep it in that same
plane, but towards the western property line. The setback lines from that would then be forty (40) 
feet on the close end, where the front door would be, and sixty -eight (68)  feet on the other
corner, which would be closer to the western property line. We are okay with that; I don' t know
about staff. Our request is based on an MU zoning classification, and it requires half the building
to be within five (5)  feet and twenty (20)  feet. That would not be within the five (5)  feet or
twenty (20)  feet. There would parking in there, so you would still have the design concept and
the connectivity. Mr. Wojtila stated that he was content with tabling the bill until the

2

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Departments of Accounting and Community Investment had a chance to think more about the
project. He stated, We committed to the building having a four (4)  sided architecture —we are
fine with that. We are also fine with any sidewalk along the entire front. If you look at the aerial
view of the site, there is actually a sidewalk at the hotel and there are other sidewalks in this area. 
Having a sidewalk here would not be totally out of character. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly made a motion to continue Substitute Bill No. 77 -16 to February
13th,  2017 and Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote
of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

78 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE
AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT A 119. 89 ACRE
TRACT OF LAND NEAR THE CORNER OF
MAYFLOWER ROAD AND ADAMS ROAD
ABUTTING THE ST. JOSEPH VALLEY
PARKWAY, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO.  1
IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

Councilmember Oliver Davis, Chair of the Zoning and Annexation Committee,  reported that
they met this afternoon and send this bill forward with no recommendation. 

Angela Smith, Area Plan Commission, with offices on the 11th Floor of the County -City
Building, served as presenter ofthis bill. Ms. Smith apologized for having to leave the committee
meeting early that day. Referring to the site plan viewable by the Council and public, Ms. Smith
stated that the property owner was seeking to rezone the parcel highlighted in red —and only the
parcel highlighted in red;  only the portion east of the bypass.  The zoning ordinance is based on
the legal description. She stated,  We certify that the legal description, as described in the
ordinance,  is the area highlighted here in red. Ms.  Smith explained that the site is currently zoned
PUD, which it was rezoned to in 2005.  In 2010, that PUD expired.  She stated, In 2013,  the City
passed an ordinance that no longer required timelines on PUD' s,  but by that point it had already
expired,  so we are kind of in this position where it' s zoned PUD but there is no active plan for us
to refer back to.  When we met with the petitioner —and all the uses were allowed under the LI, 
Light and Industrial District —we advised them to seek that zoning district, instead of trying to
go back through the process there. To the east are single - family homes zoned R, Single - Family, 
in the county— that' s east of both portions of the site. To the south is the Ameriplex building at
Interstate 80 -90,  zoned PUD. To the west, across the bypass, there is a portion zoned R, Single - 
Family, in the county and a portion zoned PUD in the City of South Bend. The site is currently
vacant. Ms. Smith presented to the Council and public an image of the site with the bypass in
view. She stated, This is looking across Mayflower Road. There is not much to see on the site, as
it is now. Other than the woods, there are the properties to the south of the site,  which are
currently zoned R, Single - Family. The property includes all one - hundred and nineteen ( 119) 
acres to be rezoned. The development so far has only anticipated development for the portion of
Lot A, shown here,  but reserves the remainder of the site for the Light and Industrial uses.  Since
the PUD expired, if they didn' t include the whole parcel, that would also be expired and they
would have to address it at some point, so they decided to address the one - hundred and nineteen
119)  acres at the same time. The site that is shown here includes a 15, 000 square foot industrial
facility. The petitioner can speak more about the specific use in question, but this is an
illustration of how the site may be laid out. This comes to you from the Area Plan Commission

with no recommendation. 

Brian McMorrow, Abonmarche Consultants Inc, 750 Lincoln Way East, South Bend, IN, served
on behalf of the petitioner. He was joined at the podium by Jeff Smoke from Great Lakes Capital
Portage Prairie III, LLC and Gordon Norquist, who is a member of the family that owns the
property. Mr. McMorrow stated that they had approached the Area Plan Commission staff in
December 2016, because they had an opportunity to develop approximately twenty -eight (28)  or
twenty -nine (29)  acres of land north of Adams Road and east of the bypass.  Mr. McMorrow
stated, For a user that' s based here in South Bend and is growing, they want to continue doing
business in South Bend. We took advantage of a great process that the City and the County have

3

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

for a project advisory team, where County and City officials come together with the petitioners
and talk about the issues that might be in play for an opportunity such as this. What we learned
was that there was effectively a void of zoning, at this time. The PUD that was approved in 2005
had expired, and the best course of action that will protect the City, the petitioner, and the
residents would be to seek approval from the Area Plan Commission and the Council to rezone
to LI, Light Industrial. Why? Because the uses that are permitted in that zone included virtually
all of the uses that were contemplated in the PUD that was approved in 2005.  The only real
exception was that a hotel is not permitted in the current LI zone and was contemplated as part of
the PUD at the time. I want to make it clear, too, that this is simply a petition to rezone the
property to apply certain zoning standards.  Any approval by the Council would not be an
automatic building permit. We are not able to put boots on the ground tomorrow morning if we
have zoning standards in place. Any action by the Council to rezone these one - hundred and
twenty ( 120)  acres on the northeast quadrant does not automatically extend similar zoning to any
of the other quadrants that are part of the petition. 

Mr. McMorrow presented a map to the Council and public depicting the entire Adams Road and
St. Joseph Valley Parkway intersection. He stated, The property we are seeking to rezone is the
one - hundred and twenty ( 120)  acres of the northeast quadrant. The properties in the southeast
quadrant have proceeded,  in recent years, to be developed as envisioned by the PUD, but the
lands in the northwest quadrant and the southwest quadrant would remain unchanged by any
action that would be taken.  In fact, the uses that were envisioned then included, in the northwest
quadrant, Single - Family, Two ( 2)- Family, Multi- Family, Civic and Recreational Uses,  and
Lifestyle and Destination Retail.  In the southwest quadrant there is Neighborhood Retail, 
Medical and Office Campus, and Assisted Living. The owner would not have the right to
develop it exactly that way either, because I think the same void exists. With respect to concerns
of traffic and safety at that intersection, we are still obligated to prepare site plans, road
improvement plans, and work with the City Engineer to make sure the appropriate intersection
controls are put in place. That is dialogue that has to happen.  We would entertain —in
consideration of the comments we have heard from the public, the Q &A we have had with the
Council —to go through the PUD process on the balance of the property, beyond these twenty - 
eight (28)  or twenty -nine (29)  acres for the initial user. We would be open to that dialogue. 

Gordon Norquist, 17530 Stoney Point Drive, Granger, IN, continued the presentation. Mr. 
Norquist explained that the property has been owned by the Waggoner family for decades.  Chet
Waggoner, the current owner, is Mr. Norquist' s father -in -law. The farm was originally purchased
around 1948 and has since been in the Waggoner family. Mr. Norquist stated that the Waggoner
Dairy Farm was happy to work with a local developer and the City, in 2005,  to develop a master
plan for the site, which was referred to as the Portage Prairie. The plan was to further build
growth, investment, and jobs for the City. He stated that the rezoning would permit the
continuation of the property and the development of the site. From 2005 to the present, the
Waggoner Dairy Farm has worked closely with local businesses and developers, and intends to
continue doing so.  He stated, The plan will continue to be the cornerstone of this project. 

Jeff Smoke,  Great Lakes Capital Portage Prairie III, LLC,  112 West Jefferson Boulevard, South
Bend, IN, continued the presentation. Mr. Smoke stated, We are the local developer and local
owner of the project. He explained that the previous PUD zoning on the east side of the site did
not allow for LI zoning, unlike the PUD zoning on the west side. He stated, I know there was
some concern about factories jumping over US -31,  but the original PUD provisions don' t allow
for that. He explained that when the City annexed the land in 2005 to develop the land. He stated
that many residents want more restaurants and retail locations like Toscana Park. He stated that
Great Lakes Capital would love to do a development in the area with retail and restaurants,  but it
could not happen until more jobs and more homes came into that part of the City. He stated, It' s
not a twenty -four (24)  hour facility. They have very limited truck traffic. It would probably be a
tenth ( 1 / 101h)  of what FedEX sees right now —eight ( 8)  or nine ( 9)  trucks a day is what they have
told me.  We are willing to only proceed with Light zoning —it would be twenty -eight (28)  acres
for this particular tenant, and then go through the PUD process for the balance of the acreage.  It
is a time - sensitive matter. We are concerned that if we wait three ( 3)  to five ( 5)  more weeks,  it
could be too long. 

0

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Councilmember Tim Scott asked, Would you consider it a continuation on the entire project, or
just looking at zoning the front end of it? 

Mr. Smoke responded,  We would do the entire project. 

Councilmember Scott responded,  Continuation? 

Mr. Smoke responded,  Sure. 

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to continue Bill No.  78 -16 to February 13t',  2017 and
Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of eight (8) 

ayes. 

01 -17

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE TO
VACATE THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED
PROPERTY:  THE FIRST NORTH/ SOUTH ALLEY
FROM SOUTH RIGHT -OF -WAY OF WEST
SHERWOOD AVENUE A DISTANCE OF 255
FEET AND WIDTH OF 14',  WEST OF SOUTH
MICHIGAN STREET AND EAST OF SOUTH

MAIN STREET. 

Councilmember John Voorde, Vice - Chairperson of the Public Works and Property Vacation
Committee, reported that they met this afternoon and send this bill forward with a favorable

recommendation. 

Councilmember Tim Scott paused the proceedings to inform Clerk Kareemah Fowler that, at that
time, there was no audio for the "
attempted to rectify the issue, Councilmember Gavin Ferlic asked that the presenters proceed. 

IT stream of the evening' s meeting. As Clerk Fowler

Maurice McGee, Cobb Funeral Home, 3525 South Michigan Street,  South Bend, IN, served on
behalf of the petitioner. He was joined at the podium by the owner and director of Cobb Funeral
Home, Roosevelt Cobb. Mr. McGee stated that they were seeking to have the alley abutting the
west end of their lot vacated. They intend to build a garage there to house their service vehicles. 
He stated, The one opposition that we had was from an employee at the church that is directly
southwest. What is important to note is that both that church and the school, Xavier, across the
street, got certified letters. Upon receiving those letters, the director of the school and the
reigning pastor of the church called us that morning giving us their praise and offering to do
anything they could to help.  So,  both Mr. Cobb and I were completely thrown off to find that an
employee actually came and opposed the measure. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked, Can you just clarify: you got a letter —you got a phone call
from the owners? 

Mr. McGee responded,  Part of the process is that we must inform abutting properties.  We only
had two:  a church — Southgate —and Xavier School across the street. The day they received their
letters, the reigning pastor of the church and the director of the school called our office to praise
our initiative and to offer any help that they could to make this process go smooth. 

Councilmember Davis asked,  So they' re very supportive? 

Mr. McGee responded, Very supportive. We were both very surprised to find an employee of the
church here in opposition. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in favor of this bill: 

Huey Scoby, Riverside Drive, South Bend, IN, stated that he hoped that Council would pass this
bill. He stated, As a minority business,  we are always saying that minorities are not given
consideration, so I hope that you would give this bill consideration and pass it. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in opposition to the bill: 

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Tom Foresting, 4581 Lake Shore Drive, Niles, MI, stated that he is a deacon at the church that
abuts Cobb Funeral Home,  clarifying that he is not an employee of the church. Mr. Foresting
stated that he had not been informed by his pastor that he had made the phone call to Cobb
Funeral Home that Mr. McGee had referenced. He stated,  I would have to doubt that, because I
was told to come to the meeting in opposition. My question is:  will there be an egress for me to
come out of that existing alley after you open it up? We need the egress.  Half of our egress at the
church was taken away. I want to know if we will still be able to use that alley with no
restrictions,  or not. 

Mr. McGee approached the projector screen, which depicted the general area that Cobb Funeral
Home occupied. He pointed out where the church was located in relation to the funeral home.  He
stated,  The church is here.  I can' t even imagine how many places to the parking lot they have, 
with an exit onto Sherwood and an exit onto South Main. This is our building. Our line abuts this
alley. At some point, whether it was a church or the previous owners, they had this part of the
alley already vacated. They have an exit that goes to Michigan Street, so there is no problem
going north or south. In addition to that, across the street from this is a school.  This house that is
sitting up on this hill, that is separate from the church, has been abandoned for ten ( 10)  years. 
There hasn' t been anyone coming down from this house, down this alley. From Sherwood, the
only people that use this alley are people attending our funeral services, because they believe it' s
part of our property. 

Roosevelt Cobb,  3525 South Michigan Street, South Bend, IN, stated that they had no desire to
block this property. Mr. Cobb stated, This is essentially a driveway that gets us access to and
from the west side of our parking lot. Once we get the garage constructed, that alley will still be
every inch as wide as it is today. We are not putting barriers anywhere. Given that the house is
right next to us,  I suppose they have the right to block that off to keep me from going through
there, but I would have no reason to block my own driveway to get in and out of the building. 
This is church property, but it is not the church proper. It is just a house that the church
purchased about fifteen ( 15)  years ago.  They used it for a seminary for a while, then they let it
go. As far as what they have lost as a result of Smart Streets —that has nothing to do with this. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly made a motion to send Bill No. 01 -17 to the full Council favorably. 
Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 
ayes. 

05 -17

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE

COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND,  INDIANA AUTHORIZING THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA TO ISSUE ITS

TAXABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

REVENUE BONDS,  SERIES 2017 ( EDDY ST. 

PHASE II) IN THE PRINCIPAL AMOUNT NOT TO
EXCEED TWENTY -FIVE MILLION DOLLARS

25, 000, 000)  AND APPROVING OTHER

ACTIONS IN RESPECT THERETO

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chairperson of the Community Investment Committee, reported
that they met this afternoon and send this bill forward favorably. 

Brian Pawlowski, Department of Community Investment, with offices on the 14th Floor of the
County -City Building, served as presenter of this bill. Mr. Pawlowski stated that there had been
no changes since the Committee discussion. He stated,  I know that the developer has been
working very diligently with APC staff to make sure that everything is in the right ballpark. 
Overall, this is a $ 150,000, 000 investment. There are no upfront City tax dollars involved, and
no tax backup as there was in the first version. This is a project that really pays for itself. As the
project gets built and then it gets assessed, we will pay for the debt service that is required for
these bonds.  The moneys don' t exist now —they will upon successful completion of the buildings
and the assessment.  The numbers that we have ballparked for the assessment —done by Crowe, 
in partnership with the Citytell us a pretty good story about debt coverage and some other
things that we were very happy to see.  Four - hundred and thirty -one ( 43 1)  new apartment units, 
overall, in the entirety of the plan. Sixteen ( 16)  Residential and Flex. That is kind of a [?  41: 12] 

no

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

work arrangement. The example I used previously was that Consuela Hawkins was on our EDC
board and mentioned that a business like hers — small, local business — wanted to expand but did
not need a big place. We kind of utilize something small like this in a totally different market
area, where they might be able to garner some more business.  That was an exciting story that a
lot of the small businesses were eager to see.  Eighteen ( 18)  townhomes bordering Georgiana
Avenue, so it has a residential feel now where the Triangle Neighborhood is, right across the
street from that. Public green space is part of the overall development —it is not private green
space with the Eddy Street residence:  it is completely open to the public and privately
maintained. The big thing is:  a newly constructed and doubled in size Robinson Community
Learning Center. 

Mr. Pawlowski then discussed affordable housing. He stated, I know in conversations with many
Councilmembers there was a question about new development coming into town —how we
might work in affordable housing components in various forms to those types of projects.  We
had conversations with the developer and other partners involved in the project, and basically
figured out ways to have some lots within the broader neighborhood of Eddy Street, all the way
over to St. Peter, etc, and have lots at the South Bend Heritage Foundation, which does work in
this area, most prominently on Hill Street. We have a really solid partner in the NNRO. The
work that they do, they continue to do with lots on which they would not have to expend any
costs.  So,  we thought that that was a good thing to work into the agreement as well. This is a
project that comes to you with approvals from the Economic Development Commission, as well
as the Redevelopment Commission. This is the final step.  After this, we would go work with a
private partner to go secure these bonds. 

Matt Gavett, Kite Realty Group, 30 South Meridian Street, Indianapolis, IN, continued the
presentation. Mr. Gavett stated, We have worked hard at developing this plan in conjunction
with the City, in conjunction with the University, to really try to fit well into the neighborhood. 
We have tried to limit the amount of surface parking that is visible to the residents. We have also
reached out to the neighborhood communities, the residents, the various neighborhood
organizations. We have had two ( 2)  separate meetings and we have received a lot of really good
feedback in terms of concerns, thoughts that they have had —such as the extension of Quigley
Place into the Triangle. Quigley will not extend through the Triangle, so if the concern is about
traffic, that has been mitigated. Also, setbacks along Georgiana Avenue: we worked out a way — 
it' s in our zoning application —that we will have ten ( 10)  foot setbacks from the sidewalks to the
buildings. We have underground parking facilities. Those facilities are necessary for the density
of the project, to create the dense, walkable, urban feel that we have with Phase I and continue
south on Phase II. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated,  First of all, I think it is important to note for the record
that a significant portion of that $25, 000,000 is in support of the hotel, which is not listed as part
of the item but in fact it is. The second thing is the expectation that the bond issue will be about
1, 300,000 per year, and we are expecting perhaps as much as $ 2, 000,000 a year in revenue. 
There is a fiscal cliff, and we are not looking forward to it. I think it is important that at some
point in time, we begin to look at one of these TIF Districts as surpluses,  repatriating some of
that money for the benefit. I know you have to pay a bond this year. I would hope that we don' t
limit ourselves to the uses simply within this TIF District. This surplus of $700, 000 —I think it is
a good time to get started on it, since we are pretty sure it is going to be there. I hope that we
have some more discussions on that in the future. 

Mr. Pawlowski, responding to Councilmember Dr. Varner, explained that there is now additional
pressure on the River East TIF District. He stated,  So,  we are going to be looking for all the
access we can find and we will be looking to do those projects —not just within this space that
we are talking about here, but outside of it. Encompassing it and serving it are definitely very
high on our priority list. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

Those wishing to speak in favor of this bill: 

7

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Marguerite Taylor, 714 East Corby Boulevard,  South Bend, IN, stated that she was the person on
the Economic Development Committee that Mr. Pawlowski referenced earlier in the evening. 
Ms. Taylor stated that she belongs to the South Bend Heritage Board of Directors, the Northeast
Neighborhood Council, the NNRO, and that she works at the Robinson Community Learning
Center which, she argued,  gives her a good perspective on the neighborhood. She recalled
criticism of the development of the Eddy Street Commons that warned that deer populations
would be driven out of the woods by Notre Dame.  She stated,  Really, what was in the Notre
Dame woods were skunks. What has come out of that is kids walking, bicycling...  I don' t think
South Bend ever was considered a college town. I have been to Ann Arbor and Pittsburgh —they
have large colleges. South Bend never was that. Eddy Street gives us the feel of being in a
college town. Ms. Taylor informed the Council that all the boards that she has been on have
unanimously voted to approve this bill. 

There were none from the public who wished to speak in opposition of the bill. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis thanked Mr. Gavett and Kite Realty for taking the time to talk to
their neighbors. Councilmember Davis stated, Over the last few situations, I have been trying to
emphasize that more and more when it comes down to zoning issues.  I think that really helps
clear up a lot of the things before we even get to this Council, and it makes development grow in
a stronger and better way. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston thanked the Department of Community Investment
and the developer. Councilmember Williams- Preston stated, I am always talking about
affordable housing. It is great to see that you are taking the initiative to begin that process and
say, " You know what? We are really going to live up to these values of mixed - income
neighborhoods and we are going to build it right into the plan." 

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to send Bill No.  05 -17 to the full Council with a
favorable recommendation. Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by
a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

06 -17

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE

COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH
BEND, INDIANA, REAFFIRMING ORDINANCE
10461 - 16 FOR CUSTOMERS OUTSIDE THE

CITY' S CORPORATE BOUNDARY

Councilmember Dr. David Varner, Chairperson of the Utilities Committee, reported that they
met this afternoon and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Michael Schmidt, Assistant City Attorney, with offices on the 12th Floor of the County -City
Building,  South Bend, IN, served as the presenter of this bill. Mr. Schmidt stated, I come before
Council today to ask for the Council to reaffirm Ordinance 10461 -16 that was passed in its full in
October 2016.  That ordinance dealt with what we call " system development charges."  It
removed compact fees and replaced them with a surcharge of fourteen percent ( 14 %).  The bill
we have in front of you uses the exact same language of Ordinance 10461 - 16,  but relates to
waste water fees for users outside of the corporate boundary of the City. With all the best
intentions, it was missed that we need to hold a public hearing and give the users outside our
corporate boundaries a chance to present their case as it relates to any fee change.  The surcharge
and system development charge related to waste water would certainly constitute a change in
fees.  So,  at this time, we ask that we hold the public hearing and we also ask that we move
forward with the confirming of Ordinance 10461 -16,  as it relates just to fees for users outside the
corporate boundary. The rest of the ordinance that you passed in October is in effect, so the
system development charges and what -not for water users are active, and that has been applied. 
So,  we are moving forward on that end. It is just this one particular piece that remains
outstanding at this time. Without the support of Council, we run the risk of having to go back. If
you recall the cumbersome nature of compact fees,  of having to open that back up and try to
figure out how to pursue compact fees against all the customers that are out there —I don' t think

8

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

that is an approach that the City wants. We hope that it is an approach that the Council does not
want at this time. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked, For the record, all of the members who are outside the
corporate boundaries have officially been notified, so no one can stand up tonight and say that
they have not been notified? Could you elaborate on that a little bit more? Could you tell me how
did you notify them? 

Mr. Schmidt responded, The statute requires a ten ( 10)  day period after the notice is sent before
we can have this particular hearing. I believe it was January 11th,  2017 or January 12th,  2017 that
the notices went out. I had them send me a notice just so that I knew that the process was
working. I believe the Director of Public Works, Eric Horvath, also had a notice sent to him. 
There is a lot of positive evidence that suggests that the notices were successful.  We took the list
of customers,  as of a certain date —so it was January 10th,  2017 or January 11th 2017. We had to
certify that this was the active list of outside customers and that all these people were receiving
the notices that were on this list. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly asked, Can you just run me through this, in terms of how this will
work in action? If we pass this tonight, when will people be expected to pay in this new way? 
What would the process be for any special exceptions,  relative to them? 

Mr. Schmidt responded,  The surcharge that was proposed in the ordinance and voted on in
October, 2016 was fourteen percent ( 14 %).  This came upon recommendation of outside Counsel. 
It also came upon recommendation of other communities in the State and through guidance of
the IURC which said to basically keep it under fifteen percent ( 15 %).  There is a ramp -up
provision —so,  2017 would be five percent ( 5 %);  2018 would be an additional five percent ( 5 %); 
and then in 2019 an additional four percent (4 %) to get to that fourteen percent ( 14 %),  then it
would be fourteen percent ( 14 %) thereafter. The City Ordinance,  Section 17 -29,  addresses what
is called a " private use agreement."  It allows for the City, through its Board of Public Works to
negotiate, with particular customers for a special rate.  It places the burden on the customer to
financially justify the reduced rate that they would be receiving. There is no formal policy in
place as to what particular elements would be used to justify such a special rate,  but it sort of has
to pass the smell test.  Once it passes the smell test and we see the financial justification of the
customers, Public Works and that particular customer would enter into an agreement. They
would then bring that agreement, after passage by the Board of Public Works, to Council, asking
for Council to agree to such a rate by action of a resolution. Part of the rules of Section 17 -29 do
require yearly check -ins with Council to confirm that the numbers that were presented in the
special rate agreement were true —that the impact is true;  that it is ongoing. So, there is an
opportunity for a really solid check - and - balance to the system. It keeps Council in the loop of
anybody receiving a special rate. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden asked, That does not preclude multiple -year agreements,  though, 
by the petitioner? 

Mr. Schmidt responded,  No,  and in fact multiple -year agreements are probably appropriate, 
however it would still have to come in front of Council and there could be all kinds of unique
language in the agreement that would place the burden, again, on that applicant to make that
justification to Council, so the Council has the reassurances that the special rate is justified. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated that the sense that he had gotten from the Committee
meeting with the petitioner was that the Council had the final say on the approval, not the Board
of Public Works. 

Mr. Schmidt responded, Absolutely. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner asked,  Won' t you make that clear? 

Mr. Schmidt responded,  Yes. Nothing can be done without Council,  and that also includes
modifications and extensions.  It does sort of push the burden back on the Board of Public Works
and the customer to put all the facts together to come with the agreement —to have that all
prepared for the benefit of Council beforehand. 

0J

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked, You said, regarding the special exception, as long as it
passes the smell test it' s okay, but do we need to have more teeth? So,  can it pass the " teeth
test "? 

Mr. Schmidt responded, I think, for my own benefit, whenever you have some guidelines to
build off of, it allows you to be more transparent with the customers.  It allows you to be more
transparent with Public Works. It allows you to hold people accountable for the deal so people
know how to approach the Board and say, " This is why...,"  instead of every customer coming
out and saying, " I think I deserve this." 

Councilmember Davis asked, Would you initiate that or would we have to initiate that? 

Mr. Schmidt responded, It would be appropriate for the City to initiate that. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

There were none from the public who wished to speak in favor of the bill. 

Those wishing to speak in opposition to the bill: 

Tom Caiya, President of UN Tek and UN Kote,  1833 Pucker Street Drive, Niles, MI, stated that
he and his organization oppose this bill. 

Richard Nussbaum, 225 South Sunnyside Avenue,  South Bend, IN, stated that he provided the
Council with information that would be helpful in speeding up the process.  Mr. Nussbaum
stated, I am here on behalf of UN Tek and UN Kote, which was originally a joint- venture of
Inland Steel, but now ArcelorMittal —which is a European company —and Nippon Steel —which
is a Japanese company. The plants have been in operation since 1990.  In 1987, there was a New
Carlisle economic development area established by St. Joseph County which allowed for the TIF
District to pay for all of the infrastructure.  The waste water that is coming from this area in the
UN Tek and UN Kote plant to the Wastewater Treatment Plant is through a conduit that was not
paid for by the City of South Bend. It was paid for by UN Tek and UN Kote with the taxes that
they paid that went toward the TIF bonds. The plant could not be located within the City of
South Bend. This is not a situation where someone is trying to avoid taxes for the City by
locating out of the County. It was way ahead of its time in a sense of regional development
because the City was involved in terms of providing its Wastewater Treatment Plant at a very
favorable rate,  with all the other partners —the County, and New Carlisle, and the private
sector —to make this all happen. That was back in 1987.  The plant now employs five- hundred
and twenty ( 520)  employees and many of these employees are South Bend residents.  Over two - 
hundred ( 200)  businesses within the City of South Bend benefit from business that they do with
this plant. The waste water that comes from the UN Tek and UN Kote plant goes through a
dedicated conduit, which means that that is the only thing that passes.  There is nothing that goes
out of it, nothing that goes into it, until it reaches the Wastewater Treatment Plant. It does not
contribute to the combined sewer overflow issue.  So,  when people come to Councilmember
Kelly in my neighborhood and are upset with flooding in their basements because of those kinds
of issues, it is caused by the UN Tek and UN Kote plant. 

Mr. Nussbaum explained that the plant is the premiere plant in the ArcelorMittal system and that
there are 10, 000 employees in Indiana working in other plants throughout the state. He stated, 
The sewer rate paid by UN Tek and UN Kote is the largest of any other customer inside or
outside of the City. The increase in rates has been over $ 1, 000,000 since 2010.  It was about

1, 400, 000 then —it' s $ 2,400,000 now.  Based on the latest sewer rate study produced by the

City, the operational revenues for the Wastewater Treatment Plant for 2016 was projected to be
35, 000, 000.  Of that $35, 000, 000, $ 11, 000, 000 was allocated toward debt service to take care of
the combined sewer overflow, which is roughly thirty -one percent ( 31 %)  or thirty -two percent
32 %) of the rate.  Everyone is right: that percentage is in there. The rate that UN Tek and UN
Kote pays is in there, but IN Tek and UN Kote does not contribute to that issue.  The results
show $ 3, 500, 000 that was allocated of that $ 35, 000, 000 for PILOTpayment in lieu of taxes — 
so that of the rate - payers paying into the Wastewater Treatment Plant, about $ 3, 500, 000 goes
towards the City budget to help pay for other services. The current ordinance is not fair. If this
passes this evening, there really is nothing that UN Tek and UN Kote can do other than contest

10

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

the ordinance,  and that would apply not only to I/N Tek and I/N Kote but to everything. There
are things that we have to do to approve a special rate, and we feel that we can do that, but the
Council has to show the reason for this surcharge. To date, there has not been any reason
articulated other than that these customers are outside the City limits. Mr. Nussbaum asked for
an additional thirty (30)  days so that discussions with the City could continue, with the goal of
working out a mutually agreeable arrangement. 

Carl Schult, 53555 Poppy Road,  South Bend, IN, stated that he believed that his residence was
hooked to the same line that comes from I/ N Tek and I/N Kote and goes to the Wastewater
Treatment Plant. Mr. Schult stated that he received the notice about changing rates.  He stated, 
We currently have a rate of over fifty dollars ($ 50)  a month, six - hundred dollars ($ 600)  a year. 
There are two (2)  retired people living in this home and getting up toward $ 1, 000 a yearjust
for sewage;  no water involvedjust seems a little exorbitant. Mr. Schult asked if, given where
he lives, he had any Council representation that had any effect on the decision on the rates. He
explained that he takes care of his mother, who lives inside city limits, and noted that his bill was
higher than hers simply because he lived outside city limits. He stated,  I just feel like we need a
little bit of relief on sewer rates.  We just retired a year ago,  and we are making the decision on
where to live in retirement. Things like this are not really a positive factor —you feel like you' re
living in a very expensive place in retirement. 

Mary Rainey,  52752 East Cypress Circle, South Bend, IN, stated that she opposed any kind of
increase,  given that she is retired. Ms. Rainey pointed out that there were programs and benefits
that City sewer and water customers get that County customers do not. She stated,  We had
extensive —I mean like thousands of dollars worth of sewage backup in our home on August 15th
and 16th of 2016,  and we had contacted the water company and the City Attorney' s office on
several occasions.  We want a fifty -fifty (50150)  program from the provider valve, which is the
only thing they said will keep this from happening again. They will not include us,  because we
are outside the City limits. We should be included in anything a City sewer customer gets,  too. 

Jesse Davis, P.O.  Box 10205,  South Bend, IN, stated that raising rates and also allowing for rate- 
payers to petition for a lower rate if their financial circumstances were dire enough was unfair. 
Mr. Davis questioned whether or not that would stand up in a courtroom. He felt that it was
problematic that it was left to the Council to decide if a rate - payer' s financial situation was dire
enough to lower the rate for them. 

Kory Demeulenaere,  Gateway Hospitality Corp., 3902 Cottage Avenue, Mishawaka, IN, stated
that she was representing two (2)  hotels affected by the possible passage of this bill. Ms. 
Demeulenaere stated, The notice was delivered to my organization on January 13th,  2017, 
however budgets for my operations were approved in November of 2016. This increase could
affect us to the sum of roughly $7, 000 a year. That $7, 000 would eliminate the possibility of
teammembers receiving bonus on a yearly basis. The staffinembers at our hotels are given an
opportunity to earn a percentage of their annual salary based on meeting their financial
obligations. In 2016, they received that by a mere one - hundred and twenty -two dollars ($ 122). 
So, this addition of $7,000 would eliminate that possibility for them, which of course is an
economic value to South Bend, given the fact that they turn around and spend their money in the
City. Those bonuses are given to all hourly and salaried teammembers.  So,  my housekeeping
attendant who makes $ 25, 000 a year and gets to come home with $ 1, 000 extra won' t have that
next year, because we don' t have the increased budget anymore. 

Mr. Schmidt returned to the podium and thanked the customers that spoke in opposition to the
bill for voicing their concerns. He stated that if Council did not take action, that there would have
to be a return to compact fees, which would be more expensive than the surcharge for the
overwhelming majority of customers. He urged Council to move forward as the City of South
Bend on this matter, to reaffirm Ordinance 10461 - 16 and allow the use of the power that exists
under 17 -29 to negotiate special rates for customers who need them. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner, addressing Jesse Davis' s question, explained that the Council
requested a fourteen percent ( 14 %)  increase that came as a result of researched statutory
authority —the rate was not made up or chosen arbitrarily. He asked Mr. Schmidt to address this
authority for the sake of the public. 

11

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Mr. Schmidt stated, As with anything, whenever we conduct a study, we reach out to our
financial advisers. In this case,  it was Umbaugh and Associates. They look at our complete
system, they look at our revenues, they look at our operating expenses, they look at the number
of customers,  and they figure out where the rates need to sit. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner asked, Did they examine statutory authority as a basis,  going
forward, for their financial assessment. 

Mr. Schmidt responded,  When we use outside counsel or in -house counsel,  it is within the
authority of the City to propose rate increases to be voted on by the Council. We provide the data
for the justification for the rate increases.  With some —with water, for instance —you have to go
down and get approval from the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission, which is an extensive
process.  With wastewater, it is a little bit different: the final determiner on rates is the Council. 
We did perform studies to determine that the fourteen percent ( 14 %)  was a defensible position
for a surcharge in the State of Indiana. That fourteen percent ( 14 %)  would be a cost - savings
compared to the compact fees that we are trying to replace. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner asked if that research was available to those like the UN Tek and UN
Kote plant. 

Mr. Schmidt responded, Yes, we have provided them with the data. Frankly, we have had a fair
amount of give -and -take. We try to be as helpful and cooperative as possible.  We both have a
shared interest in trying to get this right. 

Councilmember Davis asked how special rates could be determined for water users in a manner
that was not discriminatory to any other water users.  He also asked who would actually be the
one to determine when and for whom to apply special rates. 

Mr. Schmidt responded,  stating that any contract entered into by the City would be available for
anybody to review. He stated that if two ( 2)  customers have similar or identical circumstances
and one ( 1)  gets a special rate, then the right thing to do would be to apply the same special rate
to the other customer. He stated, If they are different conditions, that would require someone to
be treated and judged differently. The ultimate decision - making comes down to:  is there
financial justification for this particular rate - savings?  Can our financial experts review the
documents and the evidence put forward by a customer and say, " Yeah, this is legitimate, and
this is entitled to X amount of savings,"  based upon their argument. Then you move forward on
that. All of that becomes very transparent. 

Councilmember Davis asked again who would be the one to actually make the decision
regarding applying special rates. 

Mr. Schmidt responded,  It would go through Public Works... 

Councilmember Davis added, Which is a public meeting. 

Mr. Schmidt responded,  Exactly. You' ve got the agendas published, you have agenda review
sessions before a matter gets voted on, then you have the actual meeting where the board takes
formal action, and then it would come throughI' m presuming —three ( 3)  readings of Council, 
as well. So,  the initial time it would be on there for a first reading it would be a committee
hearing- 

Councilmember Davis interjected,  So,  the special exception would come back to us then

afterwards... 

Mr. Schmidt responded, Absolutely. 

Councilmember Davis asked,  So,  they go through two (2)  public bodies, then the Board of Public
Works, and the City Council to make that recommendation —is that not correct? 

Mr. Schmidt responded, Absolutely. You are correct. 

Councilmember Davis responded,  So,  it' s not just arbitrarily done so that Person A gets it, and
Person B gets it, and they walk out the room with it. 

12

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Mr. Schmidt stated, The beauty of how you guys drafted 17 -29 and how that impacts the City of
South Bend is that it has to go through Public Works, it has to go through Council, it has to be
transparent, and it gives the public the opportunity to see how it was done for somebody, to see if
it applies to them, and to move forward with the potential special rate. 

Councilmember John Voorde, addressing Mr. Nussbaum, stated, I' m not sure why I understand
the fact that you need thirty (30)  days,  if there is a negotiating process built into the ordinance. 

Mr. Nussbaum responded, As you can see,  there are a lot of hoops to go through before you can
get a special rate. There is no guarantee at this point that UN Tek and UN Kote, or anyone else, is
going to get that. There is a process out there, but we have a very limited time to contest the
ordinance.  So,  we have to get that on record while we are talking, which is why, to avoid that, I
suggested that we keep the public hearing open and see how far we can get with the contract, as
far as UN Tek and UN Kote' s concerned. That way, there is no lawsuit filed. Michael has been
very helpful. We have had a very constructive discussion, but I think it is important for the
Council to know that there has not been a study with regard to the surcharge. There have been a
lot of other studies— there' s an assisted development charge in the ordinance,  there' s a rate
study —but as far as this five (5 %),  ten ( 10 %),  fourteen percent ( 14 %)  surcharge goes,  there is no
study. That' s not good for this City, in litigation. What Michael is saying is that he got a legal
opinion that prevents this Council to assess the surcharge up to fourteen percent ( 14 %)  without it
having to go to the IURC. The Council still has to have a reasonable basis for the charges to be
just, reasonable, and non - discriminatory. I think there is a problem there. I don' t want there to be
any surprises down the road. That' s one ( 1)  of the reasons why I think we should have additional
discussion on this. 

Councilmember John Voorde asked, Are you suggesting, then, that there should not be any
differentiation between inside and outside of the City for... 

Mr. Nussbaum interjected, Not on the basis of the current record. There has not been any... 

Councilmember Voorde interjected,  So,  in the next thirty (30)  days,  if I can infer, you will be
asking for no differentiation at all? 

Mr. Nussbaum responded, We are going to object to the ordinance. Without the ordinance, there
is not a differentiation.  So,  as the record stands right now, there should not be a differentiation. 
In fact, with regard to UN Tek and UN Kote, we are paying far more than we should be paying. 
I' m not saying that, at the end of the day, the contract won' t end up being any different, but I
think that is what the record is going to show. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked,  What would be an argument for, " I don' t have to pay

as much as everybody else "? 

Mr. Schmidt responded,  What you want to avoid is too much of the case -by -case basis, but
things off the top of my head:  you look at if there are pre- treatment facilities; does the
organization do any type of pre- treatment so that the wastewater that the City is receiving does
not have to have so many resources dedicated to it? Is there a dedicated line that does not impact
the combined sewer? We are open to a variety of issues. We open to working with UN Tek and
other potential customers, but we want to be able to verify before we come to Council that this is
legitimate. We don' t want to bring something to you and ask for a special rate when we can' t
verify the numbers ourselves. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated that when he first made his presentation, she was under
the impression that there would be few special exceptions. But then she stated,  The first problem
is that I am afraid that if we pass this we will have an enormous number of people coming and
going through this 17 -29 process to try to get an exception. The second problem is that if we
don' t, then I am left to wonder if it is simply because of an issue of access?  People just don' t
know. Their rates go up, but they don' t really know why, even though if they have the right
information they might qualify. Then that sets up a situation where it is inequitable. How do you
avoid those things? 

Mr. Schmidt responded that a customer has to go through the Board of Public Works before their
case would come before the Council, and not every case will get through Public Works to reach

13

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

the Council. He warned again that a return to compact fees would be worse for the vast majority
of water and sewer customers,  inside and outside of City limits. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston responded that she appreciated the warning about compact
fees,  but that she felt that two (2)  bad choices was not a good choice at all, or a choice to begin
with. She stated,  So,  I am just trying to understand how we can do this, because I certainly
understand that we have had those conversations about how it is important that we move forward
on this, yet I don' t want to jump into a place where we are now setting up a whole demographic
of folks to be basically put in a situation where they don' t have access to the information. How
are we going to get the information out to people that they might have the ability to go through
this process...? 

Mr. Schmidt responded, If there are concerns, I think those concerns may be addressed by
including in our material that goes out to our users a part that points out Section 17 -29 to them. 
He stated that, to some extent, it is up to the customer to reach out to Public Works and express
concern for the Section 17 -29 issue.  He stated, We cannot hold everyone' s hands, but we are
there to answer and help people along the way, should there be concerns and questions, to the
best of our ability. We want to be as fair as we possibly can, but we need some guidance,  and we
feel like we are moving in that direction as to how we can handle things for users inside and
outside of the City. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked if Eric Horvath could clarify the issue further, stating, 
You' re right, we can' t hold hands for people,  but we are here to be servants and make sure things
are fair and that people know what they need to do. 

Eric Horvath, Director of the Department of Public Works, with offices on the 13' h Floor of the
County -City Building, stated that he understood where Councilmember Williams- Preston was
coming from. He stated that shortly after the ordinance was set in 2005, the Council decided that
they wanted some control over the special rate agreements and then enacted what has been
referred to as " 17 -29"  and set the language so that there had to be a clearly definable reduction in
cost to the Wastewater Treatment Plant. He stated,  Since 2006, we have not had many requests
for special rates that have come in beyond that initial contract. The burden of truth will be on

them,  as per the ordinance. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked,  You said it has to be a significant savings to the City? 

Mr. Horvath responded, A clearly definable reduction in cost. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated,  So,  basically the big users are basically are the ones
that are going to... 

Mr. Horvath interjected, No, it is not a significant but a clearly definable reduction in cost. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated that it seemed that some of these individual households
might be in the same situation as the big companies. She asked if either these households or big
companies could be awarded the special exception if they could show a clearly definable
reduction in cost. 

Mr. Horvath responded, Everyone has the exact same burden in the ordinance, and that is to
show in writing a clearly definable reduction in cost. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked,  If we do not pass this, we will have to go back to the
compact fees? Or we don' t have any time... 

Mr. Horvath responded that we have a twenty percent ( 20 %) surcharge on water and zero percent
0 %)  on the sewer rate. He stated, However, there were also assessments that were, in the
overwhelming majority, much more expensive than the new way of calculating equity charges, 
which is through SCC' s,  which everyone pays inside or outside of the City. He stated,  In the
prior ordinance,  there is not only the assessments —which are more expensive —but there is also
a ten percent ( 10 %)  surcharge on sewer and twenty percent (20 %) on water, with no residential
caps,  which is different than inside the City. So,  that stuff went away with the ordinance, as
well —and most importantly, probably —as the compact fees.  So,  if you were on sewer or
water —one utility —it' s thirty percent (30 %): the difference between taxes you pay inside of the

14

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

City and outside of the City. If you were on both, it was fifty percent (50 %). In an overwhelming
majority of cases,  it was much more expensive if we were charging the compact than charging a
fourteen percent ( 14 %)  surcharge. And the problem was that we were not enforcing the
ordinance, so we are in a position where we are going to have to do something. To be clear, 
though, the ordinance is valid inside the City, but we sent out letters to 4, 048 customers
throughout the County. He explained that this letter contained in it information regarding the
public hearing process and the provisions of the ordinance. He stated, But it said that 17 -79,  17- 
81 are repealed and replaced with this language —what people did not see was what went out of
the existing ordinance, which would be the compact fees and the assessments. 

Councilmember Davis asked if there would be two ( 2)  different significant rates that individual
families versus individual businesses would have to pay. He also asked if there was a specific
threshold at which point a reduction of cost would be considered significant. He then stated, 
There is a lady that addressed the issue.  She said that she pays into the fund but that she is not
allowed to have the benefits, when it came down to the floods this past summer.  I heard that if
she is paying into the fund, she should be able to get the benefits of that. Could you share your
thoughts on that? Why could she,  or why should she? 

Mr. Horvath responded that there is no difference in rates between a residential and industrial or
commercial customer. The only difference in rates would be between a customer inside of the
City and one outside of the City. He stated,  Currently, outside -of -the -City customers,  on water, 
have a twenty percent (20 %) surcharge. Under the new rate ordinance that we have for the water
rates,  our recommendation was to move that to fourteen percent ( 14 %),  as well, so it would not
be twenty percent (20 %) anymore. They currently do not have one for wastewater, but it would
go to fourteen percent ( 14 %).  So,  an inside - the -City wastewater customer would not be paying
differently than an outside -of -the -City wastewater customer, but everyone— inside or outside the
City; whether residential, commercial, or industrial —would be paying the same rate. Mr. 
Horvath, addressing Councilmember Davis' s final concern, stated that he would have to look
into that issue.  He stated, We created the basement backflow program to help folks that have
combined sewers and were getting backup when they started draining the vents.  We know that
we have a multiple - hundreds -of- million - dollar program in front of us,  and it is going to take a
long time there as part of our long -term control plan, but looking at that and trying to find ways
to creatively solve it, we are also looking at maximizing the existing infrastructure that we have
and keeping as much sewage in the pipes we possibly can.  In doing that, it may not specifically
take care of all of those basement backflow issues that are occurring.  What we were trying to do
is give people an option to prevent sewage from coming into the basement and putting in
industrial basement backflow preventers.  The way that program works is that you sign up and
essentially the City is paying half of the cost to have a licensed plumber come in and install the
valve in your basement, and the homeowner pays half of the cost. That was limited to City
residents. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated,  It does not take a long time to figure out that this gets
pretty complicated, as it is proposed, as it is redrawn and reassessed. At some point in time, 
everyone acting in good faith —and certainly the folks who have objections, and certainly
Council acting in good faith —if it turns into an issue where there is a legal concern, that will
simply have to be addressed at the time. As we look ahead,  this enormous proposed— however it
gets funded, at whatever percentages anybody pays —this extraordinarily expensive, and I think
in many ways partially unnecessary,  CSO consent decree that the City entered into without fully
understanding what the costs to the City were going to be.  My recommendation would be to go
forward with this favorably. Councilmember Dr. Varner recommended that if any legal issues
emerge in the future —as they had ten ( 10)  or fifteen ( 15)  years ago,  where it was handled
through the legislature —to let the courts decide on the matter. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to send Bill No.  06 -17 to the full Council with
a favorable recommendation. Councilmember Tim Scott seconded the motion which carried by a
voice vote of seven ( 7)  ayes and one ( 1)  nay ( Councilmember John Voorde). 

RISE AND REPORT

15

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  20

Councilmember Randy Kelly made a motion to rise and report to full Council. Councilmember
Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

REGULAR MEETING RECONVENED

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend reconvened in the
Council Chambers on the fourth floor of the County -City building at 8: 43 p.m. Council President
Tim Scott presided with eight ( 8)  members present. 

BILLS — THIRD READING

66 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND, INDIANA AMENDING VARIOUS
SECTIONS OF THE SOUTH BEND MUNICIPAL
CODE AT CHAPTER 17,  ARTICLES 4 AND 6 TO
ADDRESS NEW WATER RATES AND CHARGES

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to continue Bill No. 66 -16 indefinitely. 
Councilmember Jo M. Broden seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 
ayes. 

77 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE
AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT 3720 LINCOLNWAY
WEST, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 2 IN
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to accept Substitute Bill No.  77 -16.  Councilmember
Dr. David Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to continue Substitute Bill No.  77 -16 to February
13th,  2017. Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of
eight ( 8)  ayes. 

78 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE

AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT A 119. 89 ACRE
TRACT OF LAND NEAR THE CORNER OF
MAYFLOWER ROAD AND ADAMS ROAD
ABUTTING THE ST.  JOSEPH VALLEY
PARKWAY, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO.  1
IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to continue Bill No. 78 -16 to February 13th,  2017. 
Councilmember Gavin Ferlic seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8) 

ayes. 

01 -17

16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE TO
VACATE THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED
PROPERTY:  THE FIRST NORTH/ SOUTH ALLEY
FROM SOUTH RIGHT -OF -WAY OF WEST
SHERWOOD AVENUE A DISTANCE OF 255
FEET AND WIDTH OF 14',  WEST OF SOUTH
MICHIGAN STREET AND EAST OF SOUTH

MAIN STREET. 

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to pass Bill No. 01 - 17.  Councilmember Dr. David
Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

05 -17

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND,  INDIANA AUTHORIZING THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA TO ISSUE ITS

TAXABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
REVENUE BONDS,  SERIES 2017 ( EDDY ST. 

PHASE II) IN THE PRINCIPAL AMOUNT NOT TO
EXCEED TWENTY -FIVE MILLION DOLLARS

25, 000, 000)  AND APPROVING OTHER

ACTIONS IN RESPECT THERETO

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to pass Bill No. 05 -17.  Councilmember Regina
Williams- Preston seconded the motion, which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

06 -17

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE

COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND, INDIANA, REAFFIRMING ORDINANCE

10461 - 16 FOR CUSTOMERS OUTSIDE THE
CITY' S CORPORATE BOUNDARY

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to pass Bill No.  06 -17.  Councilmember Dr. David
Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a roll call vote of seven ( 7)  ayes and one ( 1)  nay
Councilmember John Voorde). 

RESOLUTIONS

17 -03

A RESOLUTION CONFIRMING THE ADOPTION

OF A DECLARATORY RESOLUTION
DESIGNATING CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE
CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, COMMONLY
KNOWN AS 401 E.  COLFAX AVE., SOUTH
BEND, IN 46617 AS AN ECONOMIC
REVITALIZATION AREA FOR PURPOSES OF A
10)  TEN YEAR REAL PROPERTY TAX

ABATEMENT FOR COMMERCE CENTER
DEVELOPMENT, LLC

Brian Pawlowski, the Department of Community Investment, with offices on the 10 Floor of
the County -City Building, served as presenter of this bill. Mr. Pawlowski stated that there have
been no changes to this bill. He stated that the plan was still to split the ten ( 10)  year abatement
up into a five (5)  year period at one - hundred percent ( 100 %)  and the last five ( 5)  year period at
ninety -five percent ( 95 %). 

Velvet Canada, Matthews LLC, 401 East Coflax Avenue,  South Bend, IN, served on behalf of
the petitioner. Ms. Canada stated, Nothing has changed.  It is the same project. We would just ask
for a favorable recommendation from you. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden asked, Has the developer yet provided the City, the
Redevelopment Commission, or the Council any feasibility studies to substantiate and/ or
delineate the parking numbers associated with this project, or the residential mix? 

Mr. Pawlowski stated that there would be one - hundred and forty-four ( 144)  units and that the
developer had not submitted any feasibility studies. 

Councilmember Broden asked, Any condos included in that? Or is it all apartments? 

17

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Ms. Canada responded, Right now, it' s all apartments because we do not have a market study
saying that there is a need for condos. 

Councilmember Broden asked, And what about the residential mix itself? One ( 1)  versus two ( 2) 
versus three ( 3)  bedrooms...  Again, relative to the housing studies. 

Ms. Canada responded, Currently, we are doing a study about the East Bank Flats, and we have a
one ( 1)  bedroom, two (2)  bedroom, and three ( 3)  bedroom.  We are looking at possibly adding
four (4)  bedrooms into the mix, but the majority will be one ( 1)  bedrooms and studio apartments. 
Depending on what happens with the East Bank Flats, that could possibly change. 

Councilmember Broden asked, Last two (2)  questions:  the grocery market square- footage; the
number -of- parking- spaces ratio —has anyone identified that, Mr. Pawlowski, and has it been
benchmarked against industry standards, yet? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded,  The square- footage of the grocery space went down after the last
agreement. Provided that stands,  that may impact the number of spaces a little bit. As of right
now, we are keeping the placeholder on a first- numbers basis.  That is based on traffic counts that
Rob Bartels did at previous times for other stores,  not just this site.  As of right now, we are
keeping the placeholder on the current number of spaces on the assumption that, if some square - 
footage is lost, there may be a slight adjustment. 

Councilmember Broden asked, And then benchmarking that against industry standards for that
square- footage? 

Mr. Pawlowski stated that Mr. Bartels' s plan is based on how his other stores have performed. 
He stated, As he said when he was here,  some of this is a moving target as they continue to
pursue it. 

Councilmember Broden stated,  There was a consultant that was brought in by the City — 
internationally renown Torti Gallas, urban designer. Have any of those recommendations been
picked up in terms of decreasing the number of units facing the garage? I am looking for the
public record to get caught up with the actual changes that were part of the compromise. 
Changes to the site plan, to the design of the building. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, We are looking at a twelve ( 12)  month planning period. Some things
will inevitably change during that period, as well, so we are going to have to catch it up on the
backend. In terms of what they have done, respective to Torti' s suggestions, the East Race space
was definitely done as part of a larger conversation that Torti initiated about that space, 
specifically. There are some other things regarding, I think, the design of the overall building — 
that could have had an impact in the space of those that have been adopted.  In terms of the
garage,  when you consider the amount of spaces and the need from not just the site going up but
the existing Commerce Center, I think some of Torti' s suggestions that were looked at may not
prove feasible in the long -run, but they are not dead, yet. We are looking at the orientation of the
garage,  overall. I think that as it sits now is how it will stay, but we, again, have twelve ( 12) 
months of planning ahead of us to see. 

Councilmember Broden asked,  Is that from a report or was that just the presentation that several

of us sat in... ? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, It was part of the overall presentation and conversation. They had a
number of phone conversations with the developer that we were not included in, where they went
over more in depth. The same things were discussed, just more specifically. 

Councilmember Broden asked, Has an architect been hired? That was a follow -up from the
report: getting at the ideas of some of the feasibility issues and long -term viability. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, In addition to the one that is on -staff from the developer' s side of the
house and then some of the suggestions that Torti provided? The City is not in any position to
hire an independent- 

Councilmember Broden interjected, No, not the City —the developer. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, The developer, yes. 

18

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston asked if the $ 5, 000, 000 listed on the projection screen
included the TIF money. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, That is the TIF money. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked, And that' s the abatement on top of that? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded yes. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked,  What does that bring us to? $ 11, 000, 000? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, $ 10, 000, 000, $ 10, 500, 000, $ 11, 000, 000.  Assuming our tax numbers
are more or less right, yes. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked, And the money from the State? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, $4, 900, 000. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked,  So,  almost half is tax dollars going into the whole
development? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, The Regional Cities plan was basically twenty /twenty /sixty
20/ 20/ 60),  as a combination of the two ( 2)  State and local funding sources in addition to the
private. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked how much Torti Gallas was paid. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded that it went through the Board of Public Works and that it was
probably about $5, 500. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked,  In response to one ( 1)  of the questions,  you said that
right now it' s apartments but that could change because you are doing a market study? 

Ms. Canada explained that the East Bank Flats were just going up, and that depending on the
demand for certain apartment sizes there, the mix of one ( 1), 
4)  bedroom apartments in the current project may change. 

two (2),  three ( 3),  and maybe four

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated,  But all apartments.  I heard something about
condominiums? 

Ms. Canada responded,  Correct. She explained that there is not currently a high demand for
condominiums in South Bend, so the plan in their projects is to start with apartments and maybe
add condominiums —only if there is demand for them —after the fact. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated,  So,  it is not a design difference. 

Ms. Canada responded, No, it is not a design difference.  It is just marketing— whether you
actually own or rent. 

This being the time heretofore set for the Public Hearing on the above bill, proponents and
opponents were given an opportunity to be heard. 

Those wishing to speak in favor of this bill: 

Jesse Davis, P.O. Box 10205,  South Bend,  IN, stated that more housing, density, and a grocery
store are all good things. Mr. Davis stated, There was a compromise made:  let' s do it. 

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street,  South Bend, IN, stated this needed to be passed.  He
stated, It' s a done deal.  It' s a good project for the City of South Bend. 

There were none from the public wishing to speak in opposition to this bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill No.  17 -03.  Councilmember Oliver
Davis seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of seven ( 7)  ayes and one ( 1)  nay
Councilmember Jo M. Broden). 

BILLS FIRST READING

19

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

CO UNCILMEMBER GA VIN FERLIC LEFT THE CHAMBERS AND THE QUORUM WAS SET
AT SEVEN ( 7). 

07 -17

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE TO
VACATE THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED
PROPERTY: E/ W ALLEY FROM EAST RIGHT OF
WAY OF LAUREL STREET A DISTANCE OF 144
FEET AND WIDTH OF 12 FEET, NORTH OF
THOMAS STREET AND SOUTH OF

WASHINGTON STREET

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to send Bill No. 07 -17 to the Public Works and
Property Vacation Committee.  Councilmember Randy Kelly seconded the motion, which carried
by a voice vote of seven (7)  ayes. 

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to continue the Appeal of a Certificate of
Appropriateness for 1240 W. Thomas Street –  Boyd vs. Historic Preservation Commission to
February 27th,  2017, without the possibility of further postponement barring extraordinary cause. 
Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of seven ( 7) 
ayes. 

NEW BUSINESS

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston requested an update on the Sample and Olive Street
Exchange,  as well as an update on the traffic study done at the corner of South Street and
Michigan Street. 

PRIVILEGE OF THE FLOOR

Jesse Davis, P. O.  Box 10205,  South Bend, IN, stated,  I just want to touch base and talk about
what Regina was just talking about. Hopefully, everybody says a prayer for the family that lost
their little eleven ( 11)  year old son today. There were previous studies. I believe there was one
by American Structure Point in 2015— probably for Smart Streets —and somewhere in there, I
guess it was suggested to eliminate that light. We then covered up that light and said it was under
study. I' m not sure if that study is still going on after it' s been concluded, but I think we need to
look at not only traffic but the pedestrian traffic. He stated that, before Smart Streets,  Transpo
was slowed down by that intersection. He surmised that Transpo was probably appreciative of
the fact that there is no light there currently. He stated that children, the elderly, and disabled
people need to be considered,  given that in the past, pedestrians have been used to only looking
south for incoming traffic before crossing that intersection. He stated that eliminating the
crosswalk was foolish and that one should be reimplemented. Mr. Davis ended by stating, If that
study has been finished, I would be curious to see why they took that light out of there. 

Charles Smith, 2023 South Taylor Street,  South Bend, IN, stated that he agreed with Mr. Davis. 
He then went on to discuss issues with Animal Care and Control. He stated that at the last
meeting with the new director of the SBACC,  serious accusations were made against several
people that could damage their characters. He described a situation where during an e -mail
exchange reporting animal neglect, criminal information meant for authorities was shared with a
private citizen. He stated that he was addressing these issues before the Council because he had
not received a response from Code Enforcement after reporting the leak to them. He stated that
he no longer trusted that tips or criminal information would remain confidential. He recognized
that the City has limitations in how it can enforce animal neglect laws, but he pleaded for the

20

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

City to do whatever it takes to make enforcement happen. He stated that ordinances must be
revised as soon as possible. He concluded by stating that he would do anything to bridge the gap
that exists between citizens and the City regarding animal welfare. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston requested that this issue, as well as the issue regarding
the intersection of Michigan Street and South Street, be forwarded to the Board of Public Safety. 

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street,  South Bend, IN, stated that he was proud of the Mayor
for standing up and making the decision to rename the downtown portion of Main Street Dr. 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard. He stated that he was not pleased with the photo used in the
paper to announce the change,  suggesting a different one,  but continued to praise the Mayor' s
decision. 

Brenda Bailey, 3621 Cooper Court, South Bend, IN, stated that there needs to be clarification as
to what is going on at South Bend Animal Care and Control. She stated that the animal welfare
community wants answers, that it is afraid of the SBACC.  She stated, Legally, we have no
choice but to follow the law. We see that there needs to be a moderator or somebody called in
that can help bridge this gap,  because the gap is just tremendous, right now. She asked, as she did
in the last meeting, why Valery Schey and other volunteers were banned from the shelter for
ninety (90)  days.  She brought up the dog,  Lucky, who was recently euthanized.  She stated that
the community was requesting for an investigation into Lucky. Surgery had been offered by
specialists and two (2)  rescuers had offered to take him, but he was euthanized instead.  She
stated that a silent vigil and protest were planned in honor of Lucky. She concluded by asking
what the City would do to repair the damage done by their new SBACC director. 

Morena Ballard, 52670 Primrose Road,  South Bend, IN, stated that she was present to support
the SBACC. She stated that she has been involved in trying to bridge the gap referenced by Mr. 
Smith and Ms. Bailey, but found that there were people who simply did not want to cooperate
with each other.  She stated that she was working with the new director to do things that will
expand the shelter and educate people again.  She stated that she did not know where things went
wrong.  She stated that Lucky' s euthanasia was tragic but necessary.  She did not feel that the new
director, Jennifer, has been given a fair chance. 

Huey Scoby, Riverside Drive, South Bend, IN, stated that he was proud of the Council, and that
he was proud of the newly named Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard. He then stated,  You
got one ( 1)  more step to go:  the Mayor promised that he would select a prominent street with a
few businesses on it and a few addresses.  So,  I' m going to hold you responsible for him putting
up those houses with a few investors on it. So,  we can' t stop at the roundabout. We' re going to
have to go down Marion Street —isn' t that where your committee started at? Isn' t that where
they were supposed to stop? Be real with me because I' m living out Dr. King' s dream. Dr. King
didn' t give his life for elites and politicians.  He turned to Mr. Brown, stating his full name, 
before Councilmember Tim Scott reminded him that he must address the Council. At this point, 
Mr. Scoby ended his message and walked away from the podium. 

Anthony Bailey, 3621 Cooper Court, South Bend, IN, stated that there were resources out there
to save Lucky instead of euthanizing him. He stated that people were losing trust in Animal
Control and the shelter, stating that this could create a safety issue wherein people do not call
Animal Control when there is a problem. 

Mary Corbett,  1605 Southwood Avenue,  South Bend, IN, addressed the Animal Control
problem, stating that if people are not getting answers, then someone working for the City is not
doing their job. She asked that items projected onto the screens for the Council and audience use
a larger font, as she cannot read them as they are.  She also asked that Councilmembers sit up
when they speak because it is otherwise hard to understand what they are saying. 

Councilmember Tim Scott informed Ms. Corbett that she could get full packets from the Clerk' s
Office on the Thursday before a given Council Meeting. 

Ms. Corbett asked,  How does one go about finding what all these things refer to? 

Clerk Kareemah Fowler stated,  You can come into our office and we can navigate it for you. 

21

REGULAR MEETING

JANUARY 23,  2017

Ms.  Corbett stated,  Thank you so much. 

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business to come before the Council, President Tim Scott adjourned the
meeting at 9: 20 p.m. 

