y

t7' 

Cn

rCD n

o. 

M° 

c

o
C

N

i/1

Ud

y

F

E

O r

r 

W. 

D
D

n
n

c

I

I 

n

n

b

b

z
y

z
y

r
n

r
n

r
r

r
r

x

x

y

y

9
G7

9
G7

tri
z
y

tri
z
y

REPORT OF SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

TO THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH. BEND: 

THE SUB - COMMITTEE HAS INSPECTED THE MINUTES OF THE

August 8,  2016

MEETING OF THE COUNCIL AND FOUND THEM TO BE CORRECT. 

THEREFORE, WE RECOMMEND THE SAME BE APPROVED: 

TI

TT

S.G7

AVID VARNER

APPROVED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL ON: 

August

ATTEST: / -- 

EMAH FOW , 

CITY CLERK

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend, Indiana met in the
Council Chambers of the County -City Building on Monday, August 8,  2016 at 7: 00 p.m. The
meeting was called to order by Council Vice President Oliver Davis and the Invocation was
given by Paul Yvarra from St. Adalbert' s Catholic Church and Pledge to the Flag was given. 

ROLL CALL

COUNCIL MEMBERS: 

PRF.gF.NT- 

Regina Williams- Preston
Randy Kelly
Josephine Broden
Dr. David Varner
Oliver J.  Davis
John Voorde
Gavin Ferlic
Karen L. White

2nd District
3rd District
4th District
5th District
6th District, Vice President
At -Large
At- Large,  Chairperson Committee of the Whole
At -Large

ABSENT: 

Tim Scott
Karen L. White

1 st District, President ( Excused) 
At -Large ( Excused) 

OTHERS PRESENT: 

Kareemah Fowler
Jennifer Coffinan
Alkeyna Aldridge
Joseph Molnar
Kathleen Cekanski - Farrand
Adriana Rodriguez

City Clerk
Chief Deputy Clerk
Deputy Clerk
Clerk Executive Assistant
Council Attorney
Legal Research Assistant

REPORT FROM THE SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion that the minutes of the July 25th 2016 meeting of
the Council be accepted and placed on file. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the
motion which carried by a voice vote of seven (7)  ayes. 

SPECIAL BUSINESS

Council Vice President Oliver Davis announced that Bill 35 -16,  regarding the South Bend
Airport, will be heard on September 12th 2016. 

Also, the Council will be accepting applications from residents interested in serving on the
MBE /WBE Utilization Board, TRANSPO, and the Historical Preservation Commission. 
Residents can pick up applications from the City Clerk' s Office. The applications are due
Wednesday August 24th by noon. 

16 -63

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, PUBLICLY
HONORING &  COMMENDING DENNIS J:  ANDRES, 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE " MAGNIFICENT
MORRIS"  FOR HIS REMARKABLE RECORD OF

CHAMPIONING THE " HOTTEST TICKET IN TOWN" 

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

Councilmember Oliver Davis invited Dennis Andres and his family and staff to stand with him at
the podium. Councilmember Davis read the resolution in full. 

Mr. Andres thanked the Council for the support they have given him in his position over the last
sixteen ( 16)  years.  He thanked the Mayor for his support over the past couple of years and
working together to bring national shows to the Morris. He thanked his wife for all the support
she has given him and his staff as well. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston thanked Mr. Andres for bringing the national shows to
South Bend and stated the quality of production we have in our theater is amazing. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly stated the work Mr. Andres has done for the Morris is incredible. 
He thanked Mr. Andres for his hard work and developing a world class theater. 

Councilmember Jo M. Broden thanked Mr. Andres for the gifts he has bestowed on this
community in this position. She also thanked Mr. Andres'  wife for sharing him for such a long
time with the City. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated the Morris is always referred to as one of the " crown
jewels"  of South Bend and it certainly is as a building but it would only be just a building
without Mr. Andres and his staff who are the real jewels and have kept it cared for and filled for

years. 

Councilmember John Voorde stated the people of South Bend have been tremendous
beneficiaries of Mr. Andres'  hard work and passion over the years and there are not enough
words to demonstrate how much good will the Morris has done for our City. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic thanked Mr. Andres for his service and for always exploring new
ideas and different types of shows and performances. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in favor: 

Charles Bulot, Building Commissioner with offices at 125 South Lafayette Blvd, stated Mr. 
Andres cared about every aspect of managing the Morris which has led to the theater being such
a tremendous success.  Mr. Andres has spent countless hours trying to book the right shows for
the audience dynamics of our area, negotiating contracts with new and exciting acts with
unproven tract records,  and supervising the dream of transforming this once aged landmark into
a bejeweled showcase.  He accomplished something that no one else had the vision to achieve, 
Mr. Andres created excitement. Now, residents can go downtown on most nights and people are
streaming into the Morris to view the latest offerings in live entertainment which leaves them
with the memory that downtown South Bend is the place where things are happening. 

Marvin Curtis, President of the Morris Performing Arts Board, thanked Mr. Andres for his
service and stated we should all appreciate what the Morris does for this City. He wished Mr. 
Andres well in his retirement. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -63 by acclamation. 
Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven
7)  ayes. 

REPORTS OF CITY OFFICES

Representing the city administration will be James Mueller. 

RESOLVE INTO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

There was no need to resolve into the Committee of the Whole. 

PUBLIC HEARINGS

There were no public hearings

BILLS — THIRD READING

There were no third readings. 

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

RESOLUTIONS

39 -16

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE

CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, APPROVING A

PETITION OF THE AREA BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS OF

ST.  JOSEPH COUNTY, INDIANA FOR THE PROPERTY

LOCATED AT 214 OLIVE STREET,  SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember Oliver Davis, Chairperson of the Zoning and Annexation Committee, reported
that the Committee met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Charles Bulot, Building Commissioner with offices at 125 South Lafayette Blvd, served as the
presenter for this bill. At the August 3rd 2016 meeting of the Area Board of Zoning Appeals, this
petition for 214 Olive Street was heard and comes to the Council with a favorable

recommendation. 

Mike Danch,  1643 Commerce Drive South Bend, served as the petitioner for this bill on behalf
of the City of South Bend. This bill would approve a special exception for the site. Due to the
current zoning classification, the existing fire station is a legal non - conforming use under the
City zoning codes.  The current plan is to raise the existing building and build a new fire station. 
The City has had to go through special exceptions and variances to conform to today' s standards. 
The plan is to build a brand new station and that will be functional before the old station is torn
down. We would not want to lose any fire protection for this portion of the City of South Bend
for any amount of time. The new building will be at the northwest corner of the site which
contains about 2. 4 acres.  Access for the fire station will be off of Olive Street. There will also be
a recreational track to be used by the firefighters for exercising and would also be accessible to
the public for their use as well. 

There were no questions from the Council. 

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street,  spoke in favor of the bill. The construction of this new
firehouse would do a lot for that neighborhood. There has been a lot of crime there recently and
hopefully this positive presence would help mitigate the crime. It will bring a lot of attention to
the area and may lead to the streets being repaved as well. 

Rodney Seward, Kentucky Street,  spoke in favor of the bill. He stated these are the
improvements we need in the City not casinos and bars. 

No one from the public spoke in opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill 39 -16.  Councilmember John Voorde
seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

16 -59

A RESOLUTION RECONFIRMING THE ADOPTION OF A
DECLARATORY RESOLUTION NO 4075 -11 DESIGNATING

CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA COMMONLY KNOWN AS 3849 SHOWERLUX

DRIVE, SOUTH BEND, IN 46628 AS AN ECONOMIC

REVITALIZATION AREA FOR PURPOSES OF AN EIGHT ( 8) 
YEAR REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT AND

CHANGING OWNERSHIP FROM SBG REALTY, LLC TO

SOMASCHINI NORTH AMERICA

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to accept Substitute Bill 16 -59.  Councilmember Dr. 
David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chairperson of the Community Investment Committee, reported
that they met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

Sarah Heintzelman, Community Investment with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City
Building, served as the presenter for this bill. Somaschini North America has taken over
ownership of the real property portion ofwhat was previously SBG Realty. This is a transfer of
the resolution so that it is in the appropriate name of the current title holder. 

Paul Morrison, Operations Manager at Somaschini,  served as the petitioner for this bill. He
spoke on behalf of the owners of Somaschini because they were unfortunately out of the country
and not able to attend. In December of 2010,  SBG Realty petitioned the South Bend Common
Council for a reduction of real property taxes with a proposal to build a manufacturing facility in
what they had hoped would be an economic revitalization area. An abatement was granted by
this Council for an eight ( 8)  year period. Subsequently a building was constructed to house the
manufacturing facility of Somaschini North America. At this facility, Somaschini manufactures
parts for the heavy truck industry. In May of 2012, they filed the paperwork requesting a
property tax abatement. Due to a change in business interests, the building was sold on October
201h of 2015.  With purchase of the building along with previous investments,  Somaschini has
invested nearly twenty (20)  million dollars in South Bend. This petition requests the Council' s
approval to transfer the tax abatement. 

There were no questions from the Council. 

No one from the public spoke either in favor of or in opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Substitute Bill 16 -59.  Councilmember
Regina Williams- Preston seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

16 -60

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY

OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, RECOMMENDING THAT

INTEGRATED AND MULTIFACETED APPROACHES BE
PUBLICLY DISCUSSED AND FURTHER DEVELOPED

WHICH ADDRESS CANADA GEESE

Council Vice President Oliver Davis asked Committee of the Whole Chairperson Gavin Ferlic to

serve as the Chair of the Council for Bill 16 -60. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to accept Substitute Bill 16 -60. 
Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of
seven ( 7)  ayes. 

Councilmember John Voorde,  Chair of the Health and Public Safety Committee, reported that
the Committee met and sends the bill forward with a favorable recommendation subject to the
approval of changes in Section Two (2). 

Councilmember Oliver Davis,  1801 Nash Street South Bend IN 46613,  served as the petitioner
and presenter of this bill. He thanked the Council for their comments and questions during the
Health and Public Safety Committee which lead to this substitute version. This is a bill regarding
the different situations our community has had regarding the local geese population. This bill
provides the framework to plan and provide an opportunity for public dialogue on this issue.  The
bill outlines that the Council believes there should be discussion between the City
Administration and public on how the geese impact the local area.  Councilmember Davis invited
Aaron Perri to discuss the bill further. 

Aaron Perri, Director of the Parks Department, thanked the Council for their interest in this topic. 
Mr. Perri expressed his belief that this is part of a broader conversation of how we deal with all
of our natural resources in our parks. We have to be more mindful of being inclusive of our plant
and wildlife species.  Currently the Parks Department is undergoing one of the most
comprehensive planning exercises the department has ever undertaken when it comes to natural
resource management.  We are about half way through that phase which is system wide and deals
with all of our parks. In the effort to help advance that work, they are forming an ecological
advocacy group.  The resolution to form that particular committee went before the Park Board
last month and is scheduled to be approved in one ( 1)  week at their next meeting. That group will

4

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

certainly be tasked with interfacing with topics like this and proactively plan for how we protect
all of our natural resources.  Mr. Perri informed the Council that the Park Department was
recently faced with a decision that involved potentially trapping and euthanizing beavers on the
riverfront that were damaging trees which then eroded the river bank causing dangers to
pedestrians. Instead of euthanizing the beavers, the Park Department came up with the idea to
place small amounts of chicken wire around the base of the suspect trees along the riverfront. 
This was a solution that allowed us to keep the beavers in their natural habitat while maintaining
public safety and maintaining our infrastructure. These are the solutions we intend to seek before
any other type of lethal methods. 

There were no questions from the Council. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in favor of the Bill: 

Charles Smith, 2023 South Taylor Street South Bend, spoke in favor of the bill. The euthanizing
of geese in Mishawaka was a mistake that many in this community have taken notice of and that
mistake could have been avoided if they would have listened to professionals such as the
Humane Society. This is an opportunity to learn from Mishawaka' s mistake and this bill is a
positive step in that direction. Now is the time to prevent the problem so it does not have to come
to that in South Bend. 

Jesse Davis, P. O.  Box 10205 South Bend IN, spoke in favor of the bill. Anytime the government
spends taxpayer' s money euthanizing any type of animal the public should be aware before it
happens. Mr. Davis stated he lives in Mishawaka and the geese would come up to his street. Yes, 
they are messy and noisy but euthanizing them was not the proper solution. This was not even a
solution that lasted a week as many are already coming back to the area. We need to come up
with a solution so that we can live beside the animals. 

Ken Glennoen, 57584 Shorewood Drive East South Bend IN, commended the Council for their
consideration of this bill. It is a great way for South Bend to set a positive precedent for other
communities to use as a model. Four hundred (400)  Canada Geese is far too many to destroy
simply because Mishawaka did not do their due diligence. The Canada Geese is probably the
most regal of the migratory birds. They mate for life and can live for as long as thirty (30)  years
and every spring they will have a hatch of goslings.  South Bend happens to be in the center of
one ( 1)  of three ( 3)  major flyways in North America. We are visited by tens of thousands of birds
each year and also have a resident population which no longer migrate because we offer them
food in the form of green grass and open water on the river. This initiative is well thought out
with Park Department involvement and the understanding of the life cycle of the Canada Geese. 
It is critical for us all to understand how to accommodate the birds and also enjoy our parks
without resulting to euthanizing like Mishawaka did. 

Mercedes Howard, South Bend Area, spoke in favor of the bill. It is proper for the City to look
into non - lethal methods to handle this issue.  There are a great deal of resources available to
manage the geese populations in a humane way. Ms. Howard asked why a sentence stating that
the Council believed the Administration should halt any relocation and extermination programs
was stricken from the original bill. She stressed that the public needs to have involvement with
this issue. 

Glenn Hosea,  1514 Michigan Street South Bend IN, stated that the geese problem has been an
issue for a long time. Mishawaka had to take such dramatic action because neither city refused to
get ahead of the game before the problem grew too large. This bill is a good step in limiting the
geese population going forward. He wished the Council luck because this is a tough and
complicated issue. 

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street South Bend, commended Councilmember Davis for
taking the time to address this issue.  Perhaps we can also look into helping the ducks at Leeper
Park who are being affected by the heavy amount of construction in that area. 

Sharon Banicki, 3822 Ford Street South Bend, commended the Council for being proactive
instead of reactive with this issue. 

5

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

Britney Lyn, Goshen resident, thanked the Council for taking the time to consider a way of
taking care of the geese without resorting to lethal methods. We have a responsibility and moral
obligation to take care of those who are weaker than us.  The root of all evil is that some lives
matter less than other lives and Mishawaka took four hundred ( 400)  lives with what they did. If
those had been dogs or cats the community would be in an outrage. We have to speak for these
animals when they cannot speak for themselves. 

Rama Ganesan,  Granger Indiana, stated she is a humane educator with the Ethical Choices
program.  She expressed her joy that South Bend is looking to manage our geese population in a
humane way. There are so many different options besides euthanizing such as amino- 
contraception or methods recommended by the Humane Society.  She also expressed reservations
about the sentence that was stricken from the bill brought up by Ms. Howard and asked why it
was taken out. 

No one from the public spoke in opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis responded that the language was stricken because in order for any
euthanizing to happen it would have already been budgeted and nothing has been budgeted for
euthanizing wild animals in this budget. If the Parks Department wanted to euthanize the geese
or another animal population in a systematic way it would have to come to the Council for an
additional appropriation and have public hearing. Therefore the language was stricken because it
was redundant and not needed. 

Mr. Perri reiterated that the Parks Department has nothing budgeted nor any pending plans to use
lethal methods to deal with any of our wildlife issues. Park Board meetings where issues like this
are discussed regularly are open to the public, they meet on the third Monday of every month at
5: 00 p.m. at the O' Brien Center. Also, the proposed ecological advocacy committee will also
operate under the open door laws and be open to the public. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to adopt Substitute Bill 16 -60 as amended. 
Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote
of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

Council Vice President Oliver Davis resumed as Chair of the meeting. 

16 -61

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF

THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND DESIGNATING

CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND, INDIANA, COMMONLY KNOWN AS 5448

DYLAN DRIVE, SOUTH BEND,  IN 46628 AN

ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA FOR

PURPOSES OF A (5)  FIVE -YEAR PERSONAL

PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT FOR: AM GENERAL, 

LLC

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chairperson of the Community Investment Committee, reported
that they met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Sarah Heintzelman, Community Investment with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City
Building, .served as the presenter for this bill. This is a move for AM General into a spec building
which is currently on Dylan Drive. This is a total investment of $3. 2 million. The total taxes on
the new equipment is $ 94, 366 and estimated taxes to be abated over the five (5)  year period is

43, 483. 

David Whitby, Vice President of Military Operations for AM General,  served as the petitioner
for this bill. AM General Service Parts and Logistics operation is a significant part of their
business largely due to the hundreds of thousands of Humvees they support around the world
with service parts, training, and other technical support. They are moving the business to South
Bend in order to become more efficient and reduce costs which will lead to the company being
more competitive. This move was the business case that made the most sense for AM General. 

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

Councilmember Oliver Davis stated it is great to hear that it made the most sense to come to
South Bend. He asked if the hundred and twenty -six jobs are already located in Mishawaka and
will now move to South Bend. 

Mr. Whitby responded that is correct. The jobs already exist and most will go to the new location
while a small handful will be transferred to their downtown South Bend headquarters and other

offices around the area. 

There were no further questions from the Council. 

Those wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street South Bend,  stated it is great that we are getting this
business located in South Bend. He asked if during that five ( 5)  year period of the tax abatement
if there was any option for South Bend to get any more expansion from AM General. 

No one from the public spoke in opposition to the bill. 

Mr. Whitby responded to Mr. Brown' s question by stating the company is becoming more
efficient with this move therefore we will be more competitive and hopefully grow that business
and that may lead to more job growth which is possible at this site as there is ample room to
expand. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill 16 -61.  Councilmember Randy Kelly
seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

BILLS FIRST READING

40 -16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE

ZONING ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED AT 4246
MEGHAN BEELER COURT, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT
NO.  1 IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to send Bill 40 -16 to the Zoning and Annexation
Committee and set second and third reading for September 26th 2016. Councilmember John
Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven ( 7)  ayes. 

41 - 16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE

ZONING ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED AT 401

EAST COLFAX AVENUE, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 4

IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to send Bill 41 - 16 to the Zoning and Annexation
Committee and set second and third reading for September 26th 2016.  Councilmember John
Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven (7)  ayes. 

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

37 -16

AN ORDINANCE INITIATED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL

OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA AMENDING

CHAPTER 21 OF THE SOUTH BEND MUNICIPAL CODE, 

ARTICLE 2 BY ADDING SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING TO

PERMITTED USES IN MFl URBAN CORRIDOR

MULTIFAMILY DISTRICT AND MF2 HIGH - DENSITY

MULTIFAMILY DISTRICT; AND ADDING SINGLE FAMILY

AS A SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE IN MU MIXED USE

DISTRICT. 

38 -16

AN ORDINANCE INITIATED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA AMENDING

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

CHAPTER 21 OF THE SOUTH BEND MUNICIPAL CODE, 

ARTICLE 3 BY ADDING GROUP RESIDENCE TO SPECIAL

EXCEPTION USES IN CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT; 

AND SECTION 11 BY AMENDING THE DEFINITIONS OF

DWELLING UNIT, FAMILY AND GROUP RESIDENCE. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to accept the substitutes of both Bill 37 -16 and 38- 
16.  Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston seconded the bill which carried by a voice vote of
seven ( 7)  ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to send both Bill 37 -16 and 38 -16 to the Zoning and
Annexation Committee and set for second and third reading on August 22nd 2016. 
Councilmember Randy Kelly seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven ( 7) 

ayes. 

NEW BUSINESS

Council Vice President reminded the Council to send the member' s TIF " wish list" to Alkeyna
Aldridge in the Clerk' s Office and also to send a list of streets they would like to see repaved to
Councilmember Jo M. Broden. 

PRIVILEDGE OF THE FLOOR

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street South Bend, commended Oliver Davis because he is
doing an excellent job on the issues that are affecting our City. Mr. Brown stated he was
fortunate enough to attend a press conference that announced the City is putting a statue of Dr. 
Martin Luther King and Father Hesburgh in downtown South Bend. Mr. Brown was concerned
that on the back of the press release for the event was a note that stated it was a completely
separate project from the MLK street renaming which the City continues to work on and hopes to
resolve by the end of the year. Even with that unfortunate comment this statue project will still
be a great thing for South Bend. Mr. Brown expressed disappointment with the South Bend
Tribune publishing an article stating that the MLK Street Renaming Committee broke the law
and also with attorney Mr. Masters for saying there are residents of South Bend who do not want
to live on MLK Drive but has not released their names. 

Jan Michalski,  1117 South 31St South Bend IN, spoke against the proposed fire station in
Potawatomi Park. She expressed her frustration that the City has not really responded to their
complaints about the proposed fire station. She stated she made two ( 2)  phone calls that day to
Aaron Perri and to Chief Cox and neither have called her back. As citizens get involved and put
effort into an issue it would be nice if there was communication between the City and residents. 
Fire Station #9 could go elsewhere and there are other properties that could be used besides the

park. 

Doris Bradley Reed, 3310 Dunham South Bend IN 46619,  spoke to the Council about inclusion
in the City' s sidewalk projects that is improving her neighborhood but her block has not been
addressed. She has lived at 3310 Dunham Street for forty -seven (47)  years and has improved and
taken care of her property.  She stated her neighbors and her are concerned that although the
blocks north, south, east, and west of her property are getting new sidewalks there seems to be no
plan to improve the sidewalks on their block. She asked that the City extend the project to her
block as well so that they will not be treated differently than other blocks. Also, she requested
that all of Kentucky Street between Western and Sample be included in the sidewalk program for
the area as well. 

Melvin Reed, 3310 Dunham Street South Bend IN 46619,  stated he came to South Bend in 1965
as an architectural engineer and he chose South Bend over other communities because the City
appealed to him in ways others did not. His job was to design and to make things work. He stated
he likes what is happening to South Bend now and there is a lot of good design going on. He
stated his concern though is the property values in the City. His block' s entire property value will

E:3

REGULAR MEETING

August 8,  2016

decrease if all the surrounding blocks have fresh new streets and sidewalks and his does not. 
Sidewalks and properly maintained yards are as important if not more important than the house
itself when dealing with property values. He reiterated his wife' s ( Ms. Reed) request that their
block be included in the City' s sidewalk program. 

Angela Sodi,  1318 North Lafayette Blvd South Bend, spoke about issues she is having with the
City regarding taking care of her easement. The City is requiring her to take care of and trim the
trees in her easement but there are far too many, possibly one - hundred ( 100)  trees, for her to
maintain without help. The easement belongs to the City and she finds it unfair that she has this
undue burden upon her. The property in question is almost two - hundred ( 200)  feet of wooded
area that she never knew was her responsibility. These are really old trees that require a
tremendous amount of work. Ms. Sodi stated she has been threatened that she may lose her house
if she does not take care of this issue.  She requested some answers from the Council for why
residents are never informed that they need to take care of the easements that they do not own. 
She stated she needs help and this is not right. 

Glenn Hosea,  1514 South Michigan Street South Bend, stated South Bend has a problem of
people sleeping under the bridges and it ruins the image of the City. The Council should get
ahead of this issue before it gets any worse. Also, Mr. Hosea expressed it is nice that the City
beautified the west corridors but they have not taken care of the side streets.  They need more
street sweepers to come down those side streets to keep them nice not just the main roads. 

Charles Smith, 2023 South Taylor Street South Bend, stated that the homeless under the bridge
will be cleaned up this week. He stated the animal control ordinances of South Bend are some of
the best in the country but unfortunately they are not being enforced. The excuses are that they
do not have the budget or staff to fully enforce the ordinance. This has lead animals to suffer in
our community on a daily basis. Actions speak louder than words, just because the words are on
the paper doesn' t mean they are going to be enforced. 

Terrell Porter, 3305 Dunham Street, also spoke about concerns for the sidewalks on Dunham
Street. He stated his neighbor' s daughter tripped on a bad sidewalk and hurt her face falling on
his car. Those sidewalks really need to be repaired as well as their street. He stated the road is
damaging all of their cars because it destroys their shocks. He asked the Council to please do
something about their road and sidewalks. 

Doris Caldwell, 3309 Dunham, stated all the people who have been reporting on bad sidewalks
have been telling the truth. The City has done a lot of improvements to the neighborhood but not
Dunham.  The street is terrible in addition to the sidewalks.  It is not fair that their block has not
received the same attention as the other streets near them. Ms. Caldwell stated she keeps her
house looking nice and the City has not reciprocated. 

Jason Banicki - Critchlow, 3822 West Ford Street,  challenged the Council to handle a serious
situation better than St. Joseph County did last year. There is no doubt that heroin and opioid
addiction has attacked South Bend just like it has the rest of the nation. And yet the County
Commissioners and Sherif decided the best way to handle this problem is to spend $ 1 million
reconstituting a drug unit that last time they had it was rife with corruption and made zero ( 0) 
impact on the effect that drugs have on our community. Mr. Banicki- Critchlow stated he hopes
this Council can see that the proper way to tackle the problem is not through criminal legislation
and unfair enforcement of laws but to say that we can make our community better by putting
dollars into treatment programs that will reduce the amount of people that use drugs. The way to
reduce dependency is through treatment and care and reduce the demand for drugs not the
supply.  If you arrest one ( 1)  drug dealer another one ( 1)  will simply pop up a week later because
there is currently a demand. 

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business to come before the Council, Vice President Oliver Davis
adjourned the meeting at 8: 25 p. m. 

