r CD

y

Z

x

c

O

m

CD

m7 
o n

co

0

CD

z

y

z

y

z

y

o

d

C

z

H

a

d
z

d

C

r

C

y

y
p
z

z

y

z

z z

y

11

11

a

a

H

H

t7' 

r

r

N

N

00

00

m

00

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

00 a
m

a

s

a
m

a
m

a

a
m

a
m

00

z
0

r
n

r

r

z
0

r
n

r

r

b

b

z
z
y
y

Go

Go

y

y

a
td

a
td

z
z

REPORT OF SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

TO THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND: 

THE SUB - COMMITTEE HAS INSPECTED THE MINUTES OF THE

November 28, 2016

MEETING OF THE COUNCIL AND FOUND THEM TO BE CORRECT. 

THEREFORE, WE RECOMMEND THE SAME BE APPROVED: 

TIM SCOTT

DAVID VARNER

APPROVED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL ON: 

December 12,  2016

ATTEST: 

40"MYAHqiF6)WUR, CITY CLERK

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend, Indiana met in the
Council Chambers ofthe County -City Building on Monday, November 28, 2016 at 7: 00 p.m. 
The meeting was called to order by Council President Tim Scott and the Invocation was given by
Reverend Diana Thompson of First Baptist Church South Bend, and the Pledge to the Flag was

given. 

ROLL CALL

COUNCIL MEMBERS

PRESENT

Tim Scott
Regina Williams- Preston
Randy Kelly
Jo M. Broden
Dr. David Varner
Oliver J.  Davis
John Voorde
Karen L. White

1St District, President
2nd District
3rd District
4th District

5th District
6th District, Vice President

At -Large
At -Large

ABSENT

Gavin Ferlic

At- Large, Chairperson Committee of the Whole

OTHERS PRESENT

Kareemah Fowler

Jennifer Coffman
Alkeyna Aldridge
Joseph Molnar
Michael Passavoir
Kathleen Cekanski- Farrand
Adriana Rodriguez

City Clerk
Chief Deputy Clerk
Deputy Clerk
Ordinance Violations Bureau Clerk
Clerk Executive Assistant
Council Attorney
Legal Research Assistant

REPORT FROM THE SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion that the minutes of the November 28,  2016 meeting
of the Council be accepted and placed on file. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the
motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

SPECIAL BUSINESS

16 -91

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, 
PUBLICLY COMMENDING AND HONORING
KATHLEEN CEKANSKI FARRAND FOR 42
YEARS OF DEDICATED AND

DISTINGUISHED SERVICE AS THE COUNCIL

ATTORNEY FOR THE SOUTH BEND

COMMON COUNCIL

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

All eight ( 8)  Councilmembers present read a segment apiece of the resolution, one ( 1)  after the
next. The floor was opened to the public to speak in favor of the bill. The following spoke in
favor: 

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre. Street,  South Bend, IN; 

Mayor Pete Buttigieg, with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City Building; 

Former Councilmember Dr. Fred Ferlic; 

City Clerk Kareemah Fowler, with offices on the 4th Floor of the County -City Building; 

Jim Masters, 350 Columbia Street,  South Bend, IN; 

Jesse Davis, P. O.  Box 10205,  South Bend, IN; 

Angela Smith, Area Plan Commission, with offices on the 1 lth Floor of the County -City
Building; 

Councilmember Randy Kelly, with offices on the 4th Floor of the County -City Building; 

City Attorney Aladean DeRose, with offices on the 12th Floor of the County -City Building; 

County Attorney Tony Zappia; 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner, with offices on the 4th Floor of the County -City Building; 

Andrew Kostielney, President of the St. Joseph County Board of Commissioners with offices on
the 7th Floor of the County -City Building presented Council Attorney Cekanski - Farrand with the
Key to the County. 

No one from the public wished to speak in opposition. 

The floor was then opened for Council Attorney Kathleen Cekanski- Farrand, so honored, to
speak. 

Council Attorney Cekanski- Farrand stated, I apologize to those of you who had regular business, 
because the people' s business always comes first. However, in the season of Thanksgiving, I
can' t thank enough the people of South Bend,  St. Joe County, Notre Dame Universityjust
everyone.  Since I gave my letter of retirement, it' s just been overwhelming the people who have
reached out to me. As I' ve noted to John Voorde several weeks ago,  I' m just eating and drinking
my way to retirement. I was lucky because I was raised by parents who said, " Work hard, and
respect each other, and do your best."  And I try to do my best, not only for the City of South
Bend, but for St. Joe County and all the clients that I ever represented,  but also just to be a good
person. I just can' t thank everyone enough. As a way of giving back, I have a small token of
appreciation. As many of you know and Aladean mentioned, it was tough raising Katie after her
dad got so sick and eventually passed away. Part of the way of dealing with the stress was to take
up amateur photography. Jennifer is going pass out photographs as a small thank you to each of
the Councilmembers.  On behalf of myself, I would like to present this to the Council as a small
remembrance: this is my favorite photo of the City of South Bend, and it was the best seller
when we had one of our first Art Beats.  So,  I thought that the Council would appreciate having it
here. Again, I can' t thank everyone enough for the great memories and working with the great
people of South Bend. 

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to adopt Bill No.  16 -91.  Councilmember Karen White
seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Scott announced that Bills No. 66 -16,  16 -85,  and 16 -90 are continued. 

REPORTS OF CITY OFFICES

Representing the City Administration: 

James Mueller, Chief of Staff

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

RESOLVE INTO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

At 7: 32 p.m. Councilmember Karen White made a motion to resolve into the Committee of the
Whole. Councilmember Jo M. Broden seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of
eight ( 8)  ayes.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, Chairperson, presiding. 

Council Vice President Oliver Davis explained the procedures to be followed for tonight' s
meeting in accordance with Article 1,  Section 2 -11 of the South Bend Municipal Code. 

PUBLIC HEARINGS

53 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE
AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE AND
REQUESTING A SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT 331 WAYNE
STREET, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 2 IN
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember Oliver Davis, Chair of the Zoning and Annexation Committee, reported that
they met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Angela Smith, Area Plan Commission with offices on the 1 Vh Floor of the County -City Building
served as presenter of this bill. Ms. Smith explained that the petitioner is seeking to rezone a
property located at the southeast corner of Wayne and William, the former Gates - Toyota Service
Center. The property is currently zoned GB,  General Business,  and they are seeking to rezone it
to CBD, Central Business District, and a special exception use for a Manufacturing Retailer; 
more specifically, for a Group Home. To the north is the property zoned Mixed -Use. There is the
current Veteran' s Clinic to the east, zoned CBD, Central Business District. To the south is a
parking lot, zoned GB. To the west is a vacant lot, zoned GB as well. Ms. Smith then presented
an image of the existing building that stands to be rehabbed for the proposed brewery and
another view of the building which will be renovated. Most of the work will be happening inside
of this building. Ms. Smith then presented the proposed floorplan for the renovations that are
planned to take place. Ms. Smith explained that the depicted parking is representational;  that the
parking lot will be reconfigured to meet the current standards for the parking dimensions and
aisle widths. Any landscaping required for the ordinance would need to be installed. Ms. Smith
informed the Council that this comes to them from the Area Plan Commission with a favorable
recommendation. Rezoning this property to CBD, Central Business District, and granting the
special exception use for Manufacturing Retailer allows for a use that' s compatible with the
existing Central Business District and will complement the surrounding uses. 

Jim Priebe, 501260 Coveside Drive, South Bend, IN, served as petitioner of this bill. Mr. Priebe
explained that Bare Hands has a brewery in Granger, IN. They are very excited about the
possibilities of relocating the brewing operation to downtown South Bend. Watching the
revitalization of the South Bend area has been, according to Mr. Priebe, a very keen point of
interest for Bare Hands. They want to make sure to bring the production facility, a small tap
house,  and, potentially, a restaurant downtown. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked Mr. Priebe how many people he expected to employ. 

Mr. Priebe responded that they currently have seven (7).  With the production facility they would
hope to increase to possibly thirteen ( 13). 

No one from the public wished to speak in favor or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion that Bill No.  53 -16 be sent to the full Council with a
favorable recommendation. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which
carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

65 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE

AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT 913 LAWRENCE

STREET AND 427 &  437 CORBY BOULEVARD, 
COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 4 IN THE
CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember Oliver Davis, Chair of the Zoning and Annexation Committee, reported that
they met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Angela Smith, Area Plan Commission with offices on the 11th Floor of the County -City Building
served as presenter of this bill. Ms. Smith explained that the petitioner is seeking to rezone the
property at the northwest corner of Corby and Lawrence.  The property is currently zoned S172, 
Single - Family and Two (2)- Family, and they are seeking the NF1 Urban Corridor Multi- Family
District as part of their petition. The site is currently vacant. To the north, east, and west are
single - family homes, zoned SF2,  Single - Family and Two (2)- Family. To the south are single - 
family homes, zoned Single - Family and Two (2)- Family, and a hotel zoned MU, Mixed -Use. 
Ms.  Smith presented images that showed single - family homes in the background of the property
to give a perspective of the size of the lot. The proposed site plan includes three ( 3)  buildings, 
which include three ( 3)  attached townhomes.  They will have access from a paved alley and rear
entry into the garage at the back of the building. The buildings are proposed as two (2)  story
units, with a common space along the rear. The petitioner is proposing five (5)  written
commitments on the land uses for this property. The written commitments include the following: 
the project site as described above shall be limited to a total of nine ( 9)  Single - Family Attached
Dwelling Units; no Single - Family Attached Dwelling Unit in the described project area shall
exceed the maximum height of forty (40)  feet to its peak; no more than four (4)  Single - Family
Attached Dwelling Units shall make up any single building mass;  a five ( 5)  foot front yard
setback shall be required along any public street runnage and a minimum two (2)  foot offset shall
be required between any Single - Family Attached Dwelling Units. Ms. Smith informed the
Council that this comes to them from the Area Plan Commission with a favorable
recommendation, subject to those written commitments. Rezoning this property to allow for a
mixture of housing types within the neighborhood would help satisfy a need in the area,  and is
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis clarified for Council Attorney Cekanski - Farrand that there were
ten ( 10)  written commitments, but that the Council is currently dealing with five (5)  due to the
limits of their jurisdiction. 

Council Attorney Kathleen Cekanski - Farrand elaborated, stating that the Neighborhood
Association also had five ( 5)  separate written commitments. Council Attorney Cekanski- Farrand
stated, When the motion will be made later this evening, if it is favorable, it will be subject to
only those that are set forth in the area plan, on which Ms. Smith just set forth, because those
were enforceable under State law vis -a -vis governmental agencies. 

Anthony Zappia, Attorney -at -Law, with offices at 52582 State Road 933 North, South Bend, IN, 
was present on behalf of the petitioner. Mr. Zappia stated, I have been retained by the petitioner
Damsha Bua LLC. The petitioner is seeking a zoning change from SF— Single- Family and Two
2)- Family— districts, to M171,  Urban Corridor, Multi- Family district. The location of the
property is 427 and 437 Corby, and 913 Lawrence. We propose nine ( 9)  two (2) -story
townhouses with three ( 3)  units in each building. Each unit has a garage with a common access
from the public alley. The public alley will be paved at the expense of the developer. Mr. Zappia
stated that the Department of Community Investment offered a favorable recommendation and
that Mr. Danch would speak shortly on the commitments of the project. He continued, pointing
to the warm reception that his clients'  development plans have received from the Northeast
Neighborhood, the subsequent positive recommendations they received, as well as the fact that
Marco Mariani of the Northeast Neighborhood Revitalization Organization sent a letter of

support for the project to the Area Plan Commission. 

4

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Mike Danch, Danch Harrier &  Associates,  1643 Commerce Drive, South Bend, IN, was also
present on behalf of the petitioner. Mr. Danch stated that the two (2)  alleys that are adjacent to
our site on the north and west will be totally paved. That will be part of the project and part of
the approval for the final site plan. That was a request from the City Engineering Department. 
The actual access for the Single - Family Attached Units are off the alleys. There is no direct
access off Corby or Lawrence Street. Mr. Danch explained that they aim to get some variances
approved, which would allow them to create Single - Family lots for each of these units. The
whole point of their approach is to keep this as a Single - Family project. Mr. Danch stated that
there were a few commitments given to the Council, such as a presented Exhibit A, enforceable
by the City of South Bend Area Plan Commission and the Building Department, and any of the
residents within three- hundred ( 300)  feet. Mr. Danch explained that these are the bodies that deal
with the land use issues that Ms. Smith previously mentioned. There are also a set of written
commitments that will be between the owner and the assigned,  so the written commitments run
with the land instead of the owners. Anything recorded will go forever, unless changed by the
Area Plan Commission, which would require a Public Hearing. The commitments with the two
2)  neighborhood associations dictate the number of units that the project will have, limited to
nine ( 9).  What is also limited is the fact that these will be primary residences,  so they will not be
rented out. The definition of the primary residences came from the Internal Revenue Service and
was approved by both of the neighborhood associations.  The recorded commitments will run
with and be enforceable by all the neighborhood associations. There is also a commitment that
the neighborhood associations get a free look at all the records that go with the neighborhood
association for the nine ( 9)  units. They will therefore be able to tell who is buying and selling
these particular units and how they are being used. They also will get the minutes of the meetings
of the Home Owners'  Association. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Bill Stenz, President of the Neighborhood Council of South Bend, Inc.,  1020 East Colfax
Avenue, South Bend, IN. Mr. Stenz explained that his organization was one of the neighborhood
associations that initially worked with the developer a few months before. When the developers
first presented preliminary drawings and site plans, the Neighborhood Council was skeptical, 
but, according to Mr. Stenz, what happened and how the parties worked through that initial
impression is a very good example of a good developer and neighborhood relationship.  Given
problems with student rentals near Notre Dame in the Northeast Neighborhood, Tony Zappia
suggested methods by which they could ensure that this project would be a Single- Family, 
owner- occupied project. Mr. Stenz stated, We' re kind of excited because we know a lot of
families that are looking for owner- occupied homes in the Northeast. Mr. Stenz expressed
confidence in the project' s compatibility with the neighborhood and stated that both the
Northeast Neighborhood Council and Northeast Neighborhood Revitalization Organization fully
support the project. 

No one from the public wished to speak in opposition of the bill. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis thanked all parties involved with the project for how well they
worked together. 

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion that Substitute Bill No. 65 -16 be sent to the full
Council with a favorable recommendation. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the
motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

60 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE TO
VACATE THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED
PROPERTY:  THE FIRST NORTH -SOUTH
ALLEY LYING WEST OF PORTAGE AVENUE, 
BOUNDED ON THE NORTH BY THE SOUTH
RIGHT -OF -WAY LINE OF BULLA STREET
AND BOUNDED ON THE SOUTH BY THE
NORTH RIGHT -OF -WAY LINE OF THE FIRST

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

EAST -WEST ALLEY NORTH OF KING STREET
IN PORTAGE TOWNSHIP

Councilmember Jo M. Broden, Chair of the Public Works and Property Vacation Committee, 
reported that they met and send this bill forward with no recommendation. 

Bernard Feeney, 715 South Michigan Street, South Bend, IN, served as presenter and petitioner
of this bill. Mr. Feeney stated that he was present on behalf of the Missionary Church North
Central of Elkhart, better known in South Bend as Transformation Ministries, directed in this
particular case by Kory Lantz. This particular alley is the first north -south alley lying west of
Portage Avenue and extending from Bulla to the south end of the property that Transformation
Ministries owns. Transformation Ministries is targeting the urban youth of this city, trying to
help them build relationships through work, focus,  and religion. They are asking for this alley
vacation, as it would allow for the aggregation of their property, which consists of the storefront
on Portage Avenue with the entire parking lot that exists to the west of the property. Mr. Feeney
stated that this would allow Transformation Ministries to use the property to its fullest for the
youth as well as provide the highest and best use of the property for the total operation of the
ministry in South Bend. 

Councilmember John Voorde asked Mr. Feeney if the large parking lot he described would be
open to the public. 

Mr. Feeney responded that, as it is currently private property owned by Transformation
Ministries, it is not open to the public. 

Councilmember Voorde then asked, What about the businesses that have traditionally used it as
parking? 

Mr. Feeney responded,  It has always been transferred, in recent years,  as part of the property that
Transformation Ministries has purchased. If Transformation Ministries chooses to develop this in
some recreational way for the people that they serve, those parking spaces would be gone. 
Transformation Ministries may keep a number of parking spaces in this area, but there is no
guarantee that those parking spaces would continue to exist as the needs of Transformation
Ministries expand, based on the number of youth that they serve. 

President Tim Scott stated that he had spoken to Kory Lantz prior to the evening' s meeting. His
purpose, President Scott explained, is to have the capacity of the parking viable for Mixed -Use, 
as the property is currently zoned Mixed -Use. Mr. Lantz said that he was willing to work with
any of the owners up and down the strip for any access and parking within it. President Scott
stated, I wanted clarification from him, as well, while it' s in his hands.  Mr. Lantz' s intent is to
make sure that there is access for business and to work with businesses to make sure that it is
workable for everybody. 

Mr. Feeney responded that Mr. Lantz had exhibited that same mindset to him, as well —that if
his vacation of the alley poses a problem for any of the adjoined corners, he is willing to work
out an access for them, subsequent to the evening' s meeting. 

Councilmember Broden asked to whom the alley belonged, from north to south, as there are
several businesses adjacent to it. 

Mr. Feeney responded that in its most simplistic form, the alley would return to the parcels of
land that it came from. It is currently owned by the City of South Bend. If vacated, it will go half
to each pieces that it abuts.  On the west side, that half will go completely to Transformation
Ministries. On the east side, Transformation Ministries will get half of the alley that abuts their
property. The other property owners will receive the remainder of that half of the alley, as it
abuts their properties. Transformation Ministries does not get the totality of the alley if vacated. 

Councilmember Broden asked, And it' s still passable at that demarcation? A car could or could

not get through that? 

0

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Mr. Feeney responded, At seven (7)  feet wide? No. It would be difficult for a vehicle to get
through. Mr. Feeney explained that there is no visible marking of where the alleyway begins and
ends.  It is one homogenous piece of asphalt extending from the rear of all the businesses that
face Portage all the way over to the street to the west, Anderson Street. 

No one from the public wished to speak in favor of or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion that Substitute Bill No. 60 -16 be sent to the full
Council with a favorable recommendation. Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion
which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

68 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE TO
VACATE THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED
PROPERTY:  THE EAST -WEST ALLEY LYING
BETWEEN LOTS 79 AND 80 IN SORIN' S 2ND
ADDITION EXTENDING FROM ST. LOUIS
STREET EAST TO THE FIRST NORTH -SOUTH
ALLEY EAST OF ST. LOUIS STREET

Councilmember Jo M. Broden, Chair of the Public Works and Property Vacation Committee, 
reported that they met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

James Masters, of Nemeth, Feeney, Masters &  Campiti, 350 Columbia Street, South Bend, IN
served as presenter of this bill. Mr. Masters stated that he was present on behalf of Blair Adams, 
Ret LLC. The petitioner owns both properties on either side of the alley. The property on the
north is Lot 79 and the property on the south is Lot 80.  There is no other abutting property owner
on either side of this property other than the petitioner. Mr. Masters stated,  We are asking to
vacate the alley that runs between the two (2) properties. The alley is not maintained. It is not
used for vehicular traffic. The purpose of vacating the alley is to either expand the existing yard
on the south side —which is at 1018 North St.  Louis — across the alleyway, or to construct
another house on the north lot, which is currently too small to construct a house on. There is no
actual use of the alley for any purpose. Mr. Masters stated that his parry thinks that vacating the
alley will enhance the appearance of the neighborhood. The Board ofPublic Works gave this
vacation a favorable recommendation, and Engineering had asked that the City be reserved an
easement over a portion of the vacated alley. At the committee meeting of that afternoon, the
petitioner received the description and dimensions that Engineering wanted for that easement, 
which is the far - eastern ten ( 10)  feet, right where it intersects with the north -south alley. Mr. 
Masters stated that there was no problem in doing that, and that the petitioner will agree to do so. 
The matter of the easement, Mr. Masters explained, would not affect Council' s decision at the
present meeting, as their decision affects the vacation of the alley. The easement would simply
be over the vacated alley. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Tom Stroka, architect and neighbor to the property, stated that he was in favor of the measure but
wanted clarification as to whether or not there will be an effect on the eastern half of the block — 
to which he is adjacent. His understanding is that there will not be an effect, though. He
additionally wanted to communicate the neighborhood' s continued encouragement of garbage
collection and other collections via the alley. He encouraged the Council to, as they vacate
alleys, consider that the people of that neighborhood do use alleys to keep garbage and recycling
off the streets. 

Steve Smith, 922 Keenan Court, South Bend, IN—who also owns the property at 717 Howard
which is adjacent to the north -south alley that bisects the property in question— stated that he
agreed with Mr. Stroka, stating that the north -south alleyway is a vital thoroughfare for the
removal of trash and waste. This is in keeping with rear - access,  loaded garages,  and things of
that nature which support better streetscapes in the neighborhood. The block to the east, between
St. Peter and Notre Dame Avenue, no longer has an east -west alleyway, and the block to the west

7

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

only has a partial east -west alleyway which allows for egress to rear - loading garages on new
construction homes that have been developed there.  He explained that he wanted to speak in
favor of removing this particular alleyway, because it will lead to the further development of
quality new homes and streetscapes facing St. Louis Boulevard on the 1000 block. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in opposition to the bill: 

Patrick Sullivan, owner of 1014 &  1022 St. Louis, explained that the 1022 property he owns sits
on the north side of the alley. He stated that he uses the alley when he is there to do repairs or
maintain his properties. There is a duplex that sits in the alley directly east of the 1022 house. He
frequently sees tenants enter and exit through the west side of the block. He feels that in closing
the alley, homeowner and resident access would be restricted. 

James Masters returned to the podium to offer a rebuttal. Councilmember Broden requested that
the map of the property be displayed for the Council as reference during Mr. Master' s rebuttal, 
which Mr. Masters agreed would clarify his position further. Mr. Master' s stated that he felt
there was some confusion as to what precisely was being closed. Referring to the site plan
displayed for the Council and public, Mr. Masters stated that on the left —i.e.,  west —is St.  Louis
Boulevard, while the top of the page is north. The parcels that his client owns are the southern
half of Lot 79 and all of 80.  The alley in question is the one between those two (2)  parcels. The
north -south alley is not being closed. Mr. Masters stated, I think that may address Mr. Sullivan' s
concern, because that alley is being kept open, as is the alley as it continues eastward. In fact, to
address the concern about trash pickup, I believe that' s why Public Works asked for the small
easement on what would be the ten ( 10)  feet at the very end of the alley as it intersects with the
north -south alley. Mr. Masters speculated that that was so that a track truck that is traveling west
along the alley has room to make a turn when it reaches the north -south alley. There will be no
interference with the trash trucks going either north and south or eastward along the alley. Mr. 
Masters then asked Mr. Sullivan if that answered his question, to which Mr. Sullivan responded, 
Only partially. Mr. Masters continued, ensuring again that it would not impede anyone traveling
north and south or those traveling farther to the east by the other properties,  like Lot 73 and 74. 

Councilmember Scott asked what street the alley dropped into. Mr. Masters believed it to be St. 
Peter.  Councilmember Scott stated,  So,  access to Lot 73 and 74 can be from a street or from that
alley. Mr. Masters responded that he was not sure if Lot 73 and 74 continue for the entire length. 
He further reassured the Council that that would not get closed. He stated that only the one- 
hundred and fifty -five ( 155)  foot stretch depicted in the site plan would be closed, leaving the
remaining east ten ( 10)  feet open. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion that Bill No. 68 -16 be sent to the full Council with
a favorable recommendation. Councilmember Randy Kelly seconded the motion which carried
by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

66 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA AMENDING
VARIOUS SECTIONS OF THE SOUTH BEND

MUNICIPAL CODE AT CHAPTER 17, 
ARTICLES 4 AND 6 TO ADDRESS NEW

WATER RATES AND CHARGES

Councilmember Scott made a motion to continue Bill No.  66 -16 until January 9th,  2017 and send
it back to the Utilities Committee. Councilmember Varner seconded the motion which carried by
a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

70 -16

E3

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28.  2016

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, AMENDING
VARIOUS SECTIONS OF ARTICLE 12 OF

CHAPTER 13 OF THE SOUTH BEND

MUNICIPAL CODE ADDRESSING CHRONIC

PROBLEM PROPERTY REGULATIONS

Councilmember John Voorde, Chair of the Health and Public Safety Committee, reported that
they met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

Councilmember Tim Scott, 711 Forest Avenue,  South Bend,  IN, served as presenter of this bill. 
Councilmember Scott explained that he was presenting a change in language to the Chronic
Nuisance Ordinance passed in 2013.  Councilmember Scott and he met with Council Attorney
Cekanski - Farrand, Legal Research Assistant Adriana Rodriguez, Assistant City Attorney Ashley
Colborn, Officer Keenan Lane and the Fire Department and Police Department, as well as Randy
Wilkerson, Director of Code Enforcement. They had gone through the ordinance again, taking
recommendations from legal citizens, with the intent of improving it. One of the improvements
considered was to properties of over fifty (50)  units. Originally, properties over fifty (50)  units
were allowed up to twelve ( 12)  violations. Larger properties within the city, such as Hurwich
Farms, Indian Springs,  and Irish Hills, did not feel that twelve ( 12)  violations within ninety (90) 
days was fair and equitable,  accounting for their hundreds ( 100' s)  of apartments. The group
arrived at a compromise:  these larger complexes would be considered in terms of parcels.  If a
property has one ( 1)  parcel, the limit would still be twelve ( 12)  violations within ninety (90) 
days. At two (2)  parcels, the limit would grow to twenty -four (24) violations. At three ( 3) 
parcels, the limit would grow to thirty -six ( 36)  violations. Looking upon the forty (40)  reviewed
during the drafting of the original ordinance in question, Councilmember Scott stated that South
Bend probably has the most lenient Chronic Nuisance ordinance.  Some such ordinances limit
those with as many as 1000 units to six ( 6)  violations within a year before being added to a
Chronic Nuisance List. The other thing missed in the first version of the ordinance was the Fire
Department.  Councilmember Scott explained that the Fire Department receives some nuisance
calls mainly relating to bonfires, trash fires, etc.,  where residents decide to burn things aside
from wood in a pit, which is a violation. Given that there are other issues in the Fire Department, 
what will be taken into consideration are violation letters from the Fire Department. Conditional
inspections could also occur with the Fire Department and Code Enforcement if a property
appears on the Chronic Nuisance List.  Councilmember Scott recounted that this had come up
regarding the Drewry' s Brewery complex. It was a code violation, and the Fire Department was
sought out in collaboration with Code Enforcement to make sure that everything was safe,  as
there was some business within the area of that nuisance property. Elaborating on the Victim of
Crime, Councilmember Scott explained that a Victim of Crime cannot be in violation of the
ordinance, but that fires must be within HIPPA regulations. If the Fire.Department is called out
multiple times for medical reasons,  those records would not be made public, due to HIPPA. 
Councilmember Scott notified the Council of updates made to the application of property
addresses for consideration of a tenant' s rights, in compliance with ACLU and HUD
publications.  He stated, I think that would kind of collaborate with our Human Rights, as well, if
something ever came up with that. Officer Keenan Lane and Legal both work with them. 
Regarding repeat violators who violate within six (6)  months of coming off the Chronic
Nuisance List, Councilmember Scott explained that there could be a five - hundred dollar ($500) 
penalty. As with all penalties, Officer Keenan Lane, Code Enforcement, and Legal are always
working with property owners. He stated, This isn' t automatic, it isn' t black or white. It is there, 
if things aren' t worked out correctly. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked whether or not the Fire Department reports to Officer
Keenan Lane or if they will have someone there specifically devoted to chronic nuisances related
to fire. 

Legal Research Assitant Adriana Rodriguez, with offices on the 4th Floor of the County -City
Building, stated that Fire Marshall Chico Rodriguez and Chief Cox were present during the
deliberations and approved everything added to the ordinance. Adriana stated, The reason we
added HIPPA was because,  at the meetings, they wanted to make sure that EMS services

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

wouldn' t be counted toward any violations. If anything comes up at the Fire Department, Chico
will notify Keenan, and he will check to see if that property has had any prior issues and take that
into consideration. 

Councilmember Scott further explained that the Fire Inspectors are part of that investigative task
force, working similarly to Officer Keenan Lane on the Fire side. They subsequently collaborate
with Officer Keenan Lane and/or Code Enforcement. He stated that Santi Garces,  who is with IT, 
was also present at the meeting to help develop the backbone of the reporting mechanism, by
which they may collate and sort through Code, Fire, Police data. 

Councilmember Davis stated that he wanted to make sure that if someone needed to procure
information, they could do so from the Fire Department as well as the Police Department. 

Councilmember Scott confirmed that they could. He recounted a situation where a person burned
every piece of lumber that he came across and Fire Marshall Rodriguez, who inspected the
matter, gave him the appropriate letters. The individuals who complained about the violator
actually called the Police to begin with, so it filtered through Officer Keenan Lane or another
member of the Police Department to the Fire Department, who then went out to investigate. 

Legal Research Assistant Rodriguez further explained that the letters sent by the Fire Department
go through Assistant City Attorney Colborn, illustrative of the collaboration between the Fire
Department and the Police because,  as Ms. Rodriguez explained, it all goes through Ms. 
Colborn. 

Councilmember Scott expressed appreciation for the Council who had voted for the original
version of the ordinance.  There has been tremendous success with the ordinance. The number of
nuisance calls has dropped. He stated that the number of properties on the Chronic Nuisance List
that he normally sees online is from two (2)  to eight (8).  Officer Keenan Lane processes
hundreds ( I 00' s)  of first warnings, though. At three ( 3)  violations, one receives a warning letter, 
at which point Officer Keenan Lane contacts the requisite enforcement bodies to work through
the issue. The original goal was to not have any violations or anyone on the list. The City' s tax
dollars, as a result, are not going toward repeat offenders.  Councilmember Scott stated that the
ordinance is working much better than he had anticipated. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston stated that she appreciated the ordinance for doing a
better job of getting at issues Council attempted to address with landlord registration. She
expressed appreciation for the collaboration necessary to effectively enforce the ordinance and
also expressed a desire to be present at future meetings and discussions. Councilmember
Williams- Preston stated that she was concerned, though, that there was an issue of subjectivity
that could creep into the enforcement of the ordinance,  arguing that the ordinance in its current
form does not distinguish between smaller and larger properties, requiring an officer to
determine through investigation whether or not a property is in violation of the Code instead of
passing over smaller property cases altogether. She stated that she had questions about the
constitutionality of using fines to bring about compliance, but thought it was wise that the
ordinance includes in its language the notion that any part of the ordinance should be stricken if
proven unconstitutional. Councilmember Williams- Preston then asked,  in relation to the
dedication of fines and fees,  what the reasoning was behind the money going to the Law
Enforcement Continuing Education Fund. 

Councilmember Scott responded, I think that we needed to support that fund. The administration
is not a big fan of reverting funds. Most of the legwork being done with this is in the Police
Department, and I think, out of anything, we need more education within our Police Department. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated that she remembered that civil penalties coming out of
Code Enforcement go to the Unsafe Building Fund. She stated, I' m not sure how that parses out. 

Councilmember Scott responded that the Police fund was what was decided on at the time. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston responded, Maybe it' s a difference because this is specifically
Chronic Nuisance = like how it comes about. If it' s one thing, it will go to the Unsafe Building
Fund; if it' s another thing, it goes into this Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund. 

10

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Councilmember Scott responded that the County seeks to keep things simple. He explained that
he had proposed at the time a third for an educational fund for Fire, a third for Police, and a third
for Code, but that it was shot down early on. This ordinance is not targeting tenants so much as
those who own the properties and are making a profit off these properties, and using the Police
Department as their management system. Councilmember Scott explained that in 2013, 
Courtyard Place on 260'  and Jefferson was on -pace for 1, 000 calls a month. He stated, That' s not
EMS, that' s not Fire, that' s not Codethat was Police alone.  It was going to be cheaper for us, 
in terms of taxpayer dollars, to put three cops there full -time instead of responding to the calls. 
The property manager was making money off the eighty (80)  or so apartments there but was
using the Police to manage their property. Councilmember Scott stated that it was unsafe, but
that as of the last few months the average number of calls has been roughly three ( 3).  He stated, 
So,  we went from three ( 3)  a day to three ( 3)  every three ( 3)  months. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston stated, Those I understand in terms of those big complexes. 
She explained that she did not see how the ordinance could currently parse between a Police call
regarding matters such as neighbors being noisy or selling drugs and a Code Enforcement issue
where someone has a leaky roof and needs to be directed to resources to help them be within
Code.  Councilmember Williams- Preston stated,  So,  that' s my fear. How do we parse that out, 
other than saying, " Well, come to me, and we' ll work with you, we' ll talk about it "? How can we
build something in, or already have something that is in place that says if this is the situation — 
instead of slapping them with a penalty or sending them mean letters —these are specifically the
things we are going to do to divert funds or support them in renovating their home,  etc. 

Councilmember Scott stated that he considered it two ( 2)  different issues, to which
Councilmember Williams- Preston agreed. He further stated, I agree that we need to look at the
separate issues within Code.  It' s just like Speed Limit signs out there for everybody —it isn' t
blanket. He stated that he had been pulled over and given a warning as opposed to writing a
ticket, though the opposite has happened as well —that there was an amount of discretion
involved in these processes.  Councilmember Scott stated that he believes that good government
has a face and is willing to communicate, and discuss and work with the citizens within the City. 
The beauty ofthis ordinance, he argued, is that there are lawyers that are willing to sit down and
talk with individuals to work out a plan; that there is Code that is willing to work out a plan; that
there is Officer Keenan Lane. If there is a Human Rights issue,  Officer Keenan Lane can refer
tenants to Human Rights. There is protection for tenants. Victims of domestic abuse have been
helped by officers showing up for a nuisance call because those officers will ask questions before
doling out fines. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston repeated that she understood, but that her concern rested
solely in the blanket nature of the ordinance and the fact that there would be individuals caught
in its net. She expressed a desire to see codification of a way to separate the two (2)  issues. 

Councilmember Scott responded, If you found someone that got caught up —that might be a
mistake within Chronic Nuisance —I would love to talk them, and so would Keenan, and so
would Ashley. If it is Code, then Randy Wilkerson, as well. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked to how much a Public Nuisance service call fee

amounts. 

Ms. Rodriguez responded,  Say, Code Enforcement has gone to a house and they have a Code
Enforcement issue —that they have gotten a citation from Code Enforcement— that is a separate
fee. Now, if they are put on the Chronic Nuisance List or given a Nuisance violation, that is a
separate fee. What they are saying is that the fees for Code Enforcement are going to be separate, 
because that is just Code Enforcement. There is a separate fee for Public Nuisance issues. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston responded that she wanted clarification in the ordinance
between cases like calling the police because of problematic neighbors and a resident not having
the funds to fix a house in violation of Code.  She also stated that the included language, " valid
complaint,"  was too subjective. 

Ms. Rodriguez responded that that was why there was an attempt to keep the language as clear as
possible so that there would be no ambiguity as to what qualifies as a valid complaint, and so as

11

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

to make the ordinance more cohesive with what is already in the Municipal Code and with Police
and Fire Department processes. 

Councilmember Scott recounted the story of two (2)  shooting neighbors in the Second ( 2nd) 
District, with one of the neighbors calling the Police with violation complaints on the other
neighbor. When the Police arrived at the scene,  it turned out that the neighbor who had called
had lied. Councilmember Scott explained that someone who lies when calling the Police
regarding violations would themselves be in violation of the ordinance.  The good part about this
enforcement is the human factor —that the Police will come out and investigate to know what is
going on, to identify root causes before fining individuals. 

Councilmember Broden asked, With regard to the management companies that would be on the
front lines of this, have you circled back to them? Are they aware of these changes? How much
feedback did you get from them? Because a lack of violations is profitable to these managers, the
ordinance directly impacts them. Councilmember Broden asked Councilmember Scott to address
how they have been brought into the circle of the implementation of changes in the ordinance. 

Councilmember Scott responded that they have had some of the large complexes come forward, 
but that Officer Keenan Lane and Ms.  Colborn probably had had the most contact with those
property managers.  He stated that the changes were mostly to the language of the ordinance, as
well as Chronic Nuisance as it affects those unwilling to work with Officer Keenan Lane. 

Keenan Lane, Police Officer at 701 West Sample Street,  South Bend, IN, asked for clarification
on Councilmember Broden' s question. 

Councilmember Broden responded that she wanted to know how involved property managers
were in the process, as some of them had big recommendations regarding this, such as legal
recommendations and certain marks to hit. She asked, How comfortable are you with the
feedback from management companies? 

Officer Lane responded that he was very comfortable with the feedback. When his position was
created, his first inclination was to meet with the larger apartment complexes in South Bend, 
because he receives so many calls from them. They had many meetings wherein they could
educate property managers or owners about what the ordinance was,  such that they could better
identify problems on which to work on their end. 

Councilmember Broden requested that the Fire Department have a visible job description for
Chronic Nuisance so that the Council could identify a go -to person in.the Fire Department, 
equivalent to Keenan in the Police Department. She asked about whether or not there were any
issues with the team' s capacity. 

Councilmember Scott explained that before Officer Lane took on the post, they were not sure
how much work would be involved. He further stated that though Officer Lane has been very
busy, he has kept up very well with the workload. 

Councilmember Davis asked how many more staffers were going to be added to the staff back in
2013. 

Councilmember Scott and Officer Lane explained that there had been interns and cadets that
helped temporarily with the effort, but Officer Lane has not had full -time help. 

Councilmember Davis voiced concern with there being only one ( 1)  person at the post. He stated
that there should be several people with Officer Lane' s skills and knowledge at the job, such that
the work is not completely on one ( 1)  man' s shoulders,  and if anything should happen to Officer
Lane, the work could still be done.  Councilmember Scott agreed and stated that these were
concerns to be brought to the Fire and Police Chiefs. 

Councilmember Broden asked, Where would this naturally fit within our purview as a Council? 
Looking at this on a periodic basis,  are we hitting the mark? Are we addressing the problem? Is
that a Health and Public Safety issue?  Can we incorporate that into a report-out function on an
annual basis? Is that something we should imbed within this, or is it something that, 
administratively, we can just put on the task? Like some of the calendaring of reports of what
we' re doing, what we' re trying to accomplish. 

12

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Councilmember Scott responded that Officer Lane files a report on chronic nuisance yearly, 
around June. He stated that he was willing to put it on the Council calendar, six (6)  months a
year. He stated that the operation has run smoothly up to these tweaks, which came about
because of what Officer Lane, Legal, Code Enforcement, and even the large complexes were

seeing. 

Councilmember Broden responded, I think that evaluative process would bring in some voices. If
that is institutionalized as a mark that we hit, that we are reviewing it as a broader group, I think
that that should benefit everybody all around. Thank you for your willingness to look at that. 

Councilmember Scott responded,  We will do a review six ( 6)  months from now. 

Those of the public wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Sharon Banicki, 3822 Ford St.,  South Bend, IN, stated that this situation was a double -edged
sword. Ms. Banicki generally considers the ordinance a good thing, but thinks that it focuses too
much on larger complexes, letting smaller properties slip through the cracks.  She stated, My
mom' s neighbor —who has had the Police out there every other day for the last month —isn' t on
the list. I don' t know how to get them on the list, but the police officers even know the people
that are involved when they' re called out there. Outside of that, she considers the measure a
wonderful thing. 

Those of the public wishing to speak in opposition of the bill: 

Jesse Davis, P.O.  Box 10205,  South Bend, IN, stated that the only reason he is opposed to this is
that he feels that apartment complexes are offered too much leniency. He stated, I don' t see
where it' s going to be a benefit to a lot of them to have more calls. You' re basically giving in to
them. He was curious to know by what criteria a property is classified as a chronic nuisance and
how he might see the long list of properties Officer Lane had to investigate. He stated,  I know
there' s a neighborhood on the southeast side off Lear Street,  Calvert area, Randolph —man,  the
cops are over there at particular houses constantly. There' s been guns, there' s been drugs, there' s
been stolen vehicles. None of those places are on the Chronic Nuisance List. If it' s only going to
be geared at apartment complexes, then let' s make it that. It need to come into the

neighborhoods. 

Myron Larimore, 402 East South Street,  South Bend, IN, stated that he was generally in favor of
the ordinance. Realtors and landlords have suggested to him that the Police should call them
every time there is a call to the property, as opposed to every three ( 3)  times or four (4)  times. 
Mr. Lambert stated that in conjunction with the Landlord Registration, this should be easy to
implement. 

Ms. Sullivan,  1209 Pyle Avenue, South Bend, IN, explained that her husband is a veteran
afflicted by mental illness and that, as a result, she has been unsure as to whether or not her home
would end up in violation of the ordinance. Ms.  Sullivan stated, Officially, I' ve had several calls. 
It is unclear to me where I fall. She explained that she had to protest to the Police Department to
have her address show that a mentally ill veteran resided there. The code word that I use,  Ms. 
Sullivan stated,  is " Crisis for a Veteran."  They sent police officers out to deescalate the situation
and not use excessive force. Then they send emergency services and whatever else is needed.  It
took several months to get that on. She stated that she did not understand why she received
excessive calls for so long before she could get the help that she needed.  She did not understand
why the responsibility had completely fallen upon her. 

Councilmember Scott returned to the podium to offer a rebuttal. Councilmember Scott explained
that the ordinance is designed for everything from single - family homes to apartment complexes. 
The issue was that the process did not feel equitable to larger complexes. It is scalable to the size
of the residence. The ordinance is there to hold people who are living in the City accountable for
being good neighbors to each other. Though tenants are often the source of the issue, it is the
responsibility of the landowner, as they signed on their tenants and are collecting a profit from
them. Councilmember Scott stated that he felt that the scalability of the ordinance would have to
be reviewed in time, as it is new. He expressed a concern that the operation was possibly
growing too large, that there were too many calls being processed regarding larger complexes, 

13

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

but that he had a willingness to try things out and evaluate and, if necessary edit, the process
appropriately. 

Officer Lane stated that he sees the ordinance as a tool for problem - solving. It allows him to
work on properties to which the Police are responding repeatedly. The ordinance is geared
toward allowing the Police to be proactive. Instead of focusing on one ( 1)  bad complex, it allows
them to spread out and make the City a safer one in which to live. Addressing Ms.  Sullivan, 
Officer Lane explained that when the Department receives a lot of calls regarding a specific
property and they forward the case to him, he goes to the property to investigate the issue. If he
discovers that, like in Ms. Sullivan' s case,  there is a veteran suffering from mental illness at the
residence, then his job isn' t to penalize the residents of the property but to assist them in getting
help. Kicking them out of their home does not solve the problem. In a case like Ms. Sullivan' s, 
Officer Lane' s job would be to get a hold of a mental health institution to help with that
situation. Addressing Councilmember Williams- Preston,  Officer Lane explained that in the
hypothetical scenario she had drawn earlier, he would get in contact with the property owner to
inform them that their tenants are being a nuisance,  selling drugs, whatever the case may be. If
the property owner has something like a leaky roof and the tenants are destroying her property
and she does not have the funds to repair the home to Code,  Officer Lane would at that point
direct her to roof repair resources.  He would then call Code Enforcement and explain the
situation, seeking out options and solutions for the property owner. The goal,  Officer Lane
explained, is to investigate the problem and find the solution to that specific problem. He stated, 
I' m trying to be a multi- tasker to help you out. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston responded that her concern regarded an owner - occupied
scenario, but that she understood Officer Lane otherwise. 

Councilmember Broden stated, going forward in 2017,  she did not want to lose Mr. Larimore' s
recommendation. She was unsure of how easy it would be to implement something like an auto - 
dial mechanism in conjunction with the Landlord Registry, but she felt that the potential was
possibly there.  She compared a possible implementation of auto -dial to how schools send
automated messages to parents when their children are absent. She stated that she would love to
see this issue brought up by property managers tackled and solved in 2017. 

Councilmember Scott responded, I think we look at every possibility, every technology.  He
stated that Chief Laskowski told him that they took in around 89,000 calls.  He stated that he
agrees with Councilmember Broden, but he wants a balance so that the Police do not become
full -time property management. Councilmember Scott stated, though, that any technology that
aids the process is completely welcome. He stated, I think that' s a benefit to landlord
registration: having the right information and contact. Officer Lane and Ms. Colborn were both
in favor of landlord registration because so much of Officer Lane' s time is not only spent dealing
with people but trying to track down who on the property he needs to speak with in the first

place. 

Ashley Colborn, Assistant City Attorney with offices on the 12th Floor of the County -City
Building, stated that issues like Ms. Sullivan' s are specifically why HIPPA protection was added
to the ordinance so as to prevent such cases from being added to the Chronic Nuisance List. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion that Bill No. 70 -16 be sent to the full Council
with a favorable recommendation. Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion which
carried by a voice vote of seven (7)  ayes and one ( 1)  nay (Councilmember Regina Williams - 
Preston). 

69 -16

14

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, ESTABLISHING
INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS AND
ESTABLISHING A MATERIALITY

THRESHOLD. 

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to accept Substitute Bill No. 69 -16.  Councilmember
Karen White seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Karen White, Chair of the Personnel and Finance Committee, reported that they
met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

John Murphy, City Controller with offices on the 12th Floor ofthe County -City Building, stated
that in 2015 the State legislature passed a law requiring all local governments to develop an
internal control policy. He stated that there have been a number of policies implemented in South
Bend government. There is a rigorous audit conducted by the State Board of Accounts on the
City, but there has not been a totally integrated, codified policy. The State has developed a
template consisting of seventeen ( 17)  points. The City has modified it, looking toward other
cities as well as using its own ideas.  The City is required to get that adopted by City Council
prior to the end of the year. In addition to the policy, there is a task force charged with looking at
all City financial policies such as cash policies, fixed -asset policies, accounts - payable policies. 
The team consists of Deputy City Controller Jen Hockenhull, Ken Glowacki of the Police
Department, Danny Copenhauer of the Fire Department, and Amy O' Connor of the Department
of Administration and Finance. They are putting together a more formalized document for
release and publication in the first half of 2017. The City is also required by law to include
training on internal controls. Seventeen ( 17)  of the City' s fiscal officers were trained in May, and
eight (8)  were trained in March. Mr. Murphy stated, We need to, however, do some additional
training. Other officials and regular employees of the City will need to do this training. Mr. 
Murphy stated that between all these activities, the City should be compliant with State law. 

Those of the public wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Jesse Davis, P. O. Box 10205,  South Bend, IN, stated that if this is doing what he thinks it is
doing, then he is absolutely in favor of it. Mr. Davis wondered, though, if this would solve the
issue by which a large amount of equipment mysteriously appeared in the County -City Building. 
He stated that he had tried to get a list of the equipment and that he had so discovered that
another set of equipment appeared at a second building on Lafayette Street. He sent in a FOIA
request and was informed by city attorneys that this was under State Police investigationthat
the Feds were involved in itand that when the investigation was complete, they would get back
to him. He has not heard anything in two (2)  years. Mr. Davis asked if this would be a measure
to hold officials and employees accountable, to create more transparency. He stated that he
would submit a new FOIA to determine whether or not the investigation had been completed. 

No one from the public wished to speak in opposition to the bill. 

City Controller John Murphy returned to the podium to offer a rebuttal. Mr. Murphy stated that
the policy was indeed designed to hold those in government accountable and to increase
awareness of internal controls. He stated that the incident that Mr. Davis referred to would fall
under the purview of this policy, as there is zero tolerance for any kind of theft of equipment or

cash. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion that Substitute Bill No. 69 -16 be sent to the full
Council with a favorable recommendation. Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston seconded
the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

RISE AND REPORT

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to rise and report to full Council.  Councilmember
Tim Scott seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

REGULAR MEETING RECONVENED

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend reconvened in the
Council Chambers on the fourth floor of the County -City building at 9: 07 p.m. Council President
Tim Scott presided with eight (8)  members present. 

15

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

BILLS — THIRD READING

53 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE
AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE AND
REQUESTING A SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT 331 WAYNE
STREET, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 2 IN
THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to pass Bill No. 53 -16.  Councilmember Karen
White seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

60 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE TO
VACATE THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED
PROPERTY: THE FIRST NORTH -SOUTH
ALLEY LYING WEST OF PORTAGE AVENUE, 
BOUNDED ON THE NORTH BY THE SOUTH
RIGHT -OF -WAY LINE OF BULLA STREET
AND BOUNDED ON THE SOUTH BY THE
NORTH RIGHT -OF -WAY LINE OF THE FIRST
EAST -WEST ALLEY NORTH OF KING STREET
IN PORTAGE TOWNSHIP

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to pass Bill No.  60 -16.  Councilmember Dr. David
Varner seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of six ( 6)  ayes and two (2)  nays
Councilmembers Jo Broden and John Voorde). 

65 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE

AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
PROPERTY LOCATED AT 913 LAWRENCE
STREET AND 427 &  437 CORBY BOULEVARD, 

COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 4 IN THE

CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to amend Bill No.  65 -16 as it was in the Committee
of the Whole. Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote
of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to pass Bill No. 65 -16 as amended.  Councilmember
Randy Kelly seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

68 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE TO

VACATE THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED

PROPERTY: THE EAST -WEST ALLEY LYING

BETWEEN LOTS 79 AND 80 IN SORIN' S 2ND

ADDITION EXTENDING FROM ST.  LOUIS

STREET EAST TO THE FIRST NORTH -SOUTH

ALLEY EAST OF ST. LOUIS STREET

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to amend Bill No.  68 -16 as it was in the Committee
of the Whole.  Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice
vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to pass Bill No. 68 -16 as amended. Councilmember
Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

16

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

69 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, ESTABLISHING
INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS AND
ESTABLISHING A MATERIALITY

THRESHOLD. 

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to amend Bill No. 69 -16 as it was in the Committee
of the Whole. Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote
of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to pass Bill No. 69 -16 as amended. Councilmember
Karen White seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

70 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, AMENDING
VARIOUS SECTIONS OF ARTICLE 12 OF
CHAPTER 13 OF THE SOUTH BEND
MUNICIPAL CODE ADDRESSING CHRONIC
PROBLEM PROPERTY REGULATIONS

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to amend Bill No. 70 -16 as it was in the Committee
of the Whole. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice
vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to pass Bill No. 70 -16 as amended.  Councilmember
Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of seven ( 7)  ayes and one
1)  nay ( Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston). 

RESOLUTIONS

16 -85

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND
DESIGNATING CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE
CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 
COMMONLY KNOWN AS 23464 ADAMS

ROAD,  SOUTH BEND,  IN 46628 AN
ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA FOR
PURPOSES OF A (9)  NINE -YEAR REAL
PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT FOR GLC

PORTAGE PRAIRIE, LLC

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to continue Bill No.  16 -85 until December 12th
2016 and send it back to the Department of Community Investment. Councilmember John
Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

16 -86

17

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 
APPROVING A WAIVER OF

NONCOMPLIANCE FOR LATE -FILED

SCHEDULE OF DEDUCTION FROM

ASSESSED VALUATION PERSONAL

PROPERTY IN ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION
AREA (FORM 103 -ERA) AND COMPLIANCE
WITH STATEMENT OF BENEFITS PERSONAL

PROPERTY (FORM CF -1 /  PP)  BY NOBLE

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

AMERICAS SOUTH BEND ETHANOL LLC
FOR CERTAIN PERSONAL PROPERTY
LOCATED AT 3201 WEST CALVERT STREET
DESIGNATED AS AN ECONOMIC
REVITALIZATION AREA UNDER
RESOLUTION 4332 -14

Council President Tim Scott reported that the Community Investment Committee met today and
send this forward with no recommendation. 

Aaron Kobb, Community Investment, with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City Building, 
served as presenter of this bill. Mr. Kobb stated that the resolution in question is for a five ( 5) 
year personal property tax abatement that was granted in April 2014 for Noble Americas.  That
approval was the first step in the process for the petitioner. From then on, they have been and are
responsible for filing paperwork to the County Auditor' s Office for that abatement, which would
be reflected on their tax bill. If that filing deadline is missed, the Council has the ability to grant
a resolution for waiver of noncompliance, which would allow the County Auditor to then view
that waiver and reapply that abatement to the tax bill that was missed. 

Rob Winks,  50946 Hawthorne Meadow Drive, South Bend, IN, stated that the issue relates to the
March 1St,  2015 assessment date for property tax filing. It was filed timely in May 2015, 
excluding the Form 103 -ERA for the abatement amount, which was for year one ( 1).  The error
for the prior year was found when the filing was made for the December 31St,  2015 property tax
return that was due May 2016. At that point in time, it had been found by a new staff member in
Noble Americas'  Corporate Tax Department. Mr. Winks stated, At that point, we went ahead and
filed the filing for December 31 St,  2015 timely in May with the year two (2)  abatement included
in the return. Noble Americas then requested the option of amending the 2015 tax return related
to the March 1st assessment. The taxes charged by the County were paid in the full gross amount
and in a timely manner in May and November of 2016. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion to pass Bill No.  16 -86.  Councilmember Oliver
Davis seconded the motion which carried by a roll call vote of eight ( 8)  ayes. 

16 -90

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 

REQUESTING PROGRESS REPORTS TO BE

GIVEN ANNUALLY TO THE ZONING AND

ANNEXATION COMMITTEE ON EACH

NEIGHBORHOOD AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to continue Bill No.  16 -90 until December 12th,  2016
and send it to the Zoning and Annexation Committee.  Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston
seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of eight (8)  ayes. 

BILLS FIRST READING

7246

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE

INITIATED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF

THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

AMENDING CHAPTER 21 OF THE SOUTH
BEND MUNICIPAL CODE, ARTICLE 3 BY

ADDING SHARED HOUSING TO PERMITTED

PRIMARY USES IN CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS

DISTRICT; AND SECTION 11 BY ADDING THE

DEFINITION OF SHARED HOUSING

COUNCILMEMBER OLIVER DA VIS EXITED THE CHAMBERS AT 9: 18 p. m.  THE Q UOR UM
IS NOW SET AT SEVEN (7). 

18

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill No. 72 -16 to the Area Plan
Commission. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice
vote of seven ( 7)  ayes and zero ( 0)  nays. 

73 -16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH
BEND,  INDIANA, AMENDING CHAPTER 2, 
ARTICLE 14 OF THE SOUTH BEND
MUNICIPAL CODE TO ESTABLISH VARIOUS
NEW FUNDS:  LOCAL ROAD AND BRIDGE
MATCHING GRANT FUND (265), 
EQUIPMENT/VEHICLE LEASING FUND ( 750), 
PARKS BOND CAPITAL FUND ( 751),  SOUTH
BEND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FUND
752),  SMART STREETS BOND CAPITAL
FUND ( 753),  INDUSTRIAL REVOLVING FUND

754),  SOUTH BEND BUILDING

CORPORATION FUND ( 755),  SMART STREETS

DEBT SERVICE FUND ( 756),  PARKS BOND

DEBT SERVICE FUND ( 757),  THE ERSKINE
VILLAGE DEBT SERVICE FUND ( 758),  AND
CHANGING THE NAME OF FUND 279 TO THE
IT /INNOVATION /311 CALL CENTER FUND

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill No.  73 - 16 to the Public Works and
Property Vacation Committee and to set public hearing for December 12th,  2016. 
Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven ( 7) 
ayes and zero ( 0)  nays. 

74 -16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE

COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND,  INDIANA, APPROPRIATING

ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR CERTAIN

DEPARTMENTAL AND ENTERPRISE

OPERATIONS IN 2016 OF $ 220, 000 FROM
CONSOLIDATED BUILDING FUND ( #600), 

120, 000 FROM SOLID WASTE FUND ( #610), 
5, 000 FROM WATER WORKS CUSTOMER

DEPOSIT FUND (#624),$ 4, 000 FROM WATER

WORKS SINKING FUND (# 625),$ 5, 000 FROM

WATER WORKS BOND RESERVE FUND

626),$ 11, 000 FROM WATER WORKS DEBT
RESERVE O &M FUND ( #629), $ 45, 000 FROM
SEWER INSURANCE FUND ( #640), $ 22, 000

FROM SEWAGE WORKS O &M RESERVE

FUND ( #643), $ 5 FROM 2015 SEWER BOND

ISSUANCE FUND ( #666),  AND $346, 506 FROM

CENTURY CENTER FUND ( #670). 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill No. 74 -16 to the Utilities Committee
and set public hearing for December 12th 2016.  Councilmember John Voorde seconded the
motion which carried by a voice vote of seven (7)  ayes and zero ( 0)  nays. 

75 -16

19

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE

COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND, INDIANA, FOR BUDGET TRANSFERS

FOR VARIOUS DEPARTMENTS WITHIN THE
CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA FOR THE

YEAR 2016

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to send Bill No.  75 -16 to the Personnel and Finance
Committee and to set second reading and public hearing for December 12th,  2016. 
Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven
7)  ayes and zero ( 0)  nays. 

76 -16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF THE
COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH

BEND, INDIANA, APPROPRIATING

ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR CERTAIN

DEPARTMENTAL AND CITY SERVICES

OPERATIONS IN 2016 OF $ 364, 100 FROM

GENERAL FUND (# 101), $ 25, 000 FROM
UNSAFE BUILDING FUND (#219),$ 25, 000
FROM LOCAL ROADS &  STREETS FUND

251), $ 150, 000 FROM LOIT 2016 SPECIAL

DISTRIBUTION FUND (#257),$ 10, 000 FROM

INDIANA RIVER RESCUE FUND ( #291), 

212, 542 FROM COPS MORE GRANT FUND
295),$ 150, 000 FROM COUNTY OPTION

INCOME TAX FUND ( #404)  AND $100, 000

FROM PARKS NONREVERTING CAPITAL

FUND ( #405). 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill No.  76 -16 to the Personnel and Finance
Committee and to set second reading and public hearing for December 12th, 2016. 
Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven ( 7) 
ayes and zero ( 0)  nays. 

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

16 -89

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 

APPROVING A PETITION OF THE AREA

BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS FOR THE

PROPERTY LOCATED AT LOTS 2 AND 3

COVELESKI PARK MINOR SUBDIVISION

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA 46601

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill No.  16 -89 to the Zoning and
Annexation Committee and to set public hearing for December 12th,  2016.  Councilmember Dr. 
David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of seven ( 7) 'ayes and zero ( 0) 
nays. 

NEW BUSINESS

Councilmember Tim Scott announced that there would not be a second December Common
Council meeting on December 26th, 2016. 

Councilmember Jo Broden asked whether or not it was possible to have joint committee
meetings to discuss bills where the purview of more than one committee overlaps.  Council
Attorney Cekanski - Farrand explained that committees have historically forgone joint meetings in
favor of single committee meetings where the bill is referred to the committee to which it is the
most relevant. Councilmember Broden stated that she thought it would be easier for the public to
track if there were joint- discussions on these bills. Councilmember Tim Scott stated that he
assumes that anything having to do with Utilities goes to the Utilities Committee, even when
discussing funds. 

20

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28,  2016

Councilmember Broden asked what the process was for acquiring a new Council Attorney. Legal
Research Assistant Rodriguez explained that the job has not yet been posted. Because
Councilmember Broden had sent recommendations that needed to be included in the job posting, 
Ms. Rodriguez stated that she would update the job description and get it subsequently posted. 

PRIVILEGE OF THE FLOOR

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street,  South Bend, IN, stated that he was there as a
commissioner of the Human Rights Committee.  He explained that he had been appointed as a
Human Rights officer after the death of his predecessor in office. Mr. Brown stated that he felt
fortunate to be chosen and hoped to be approved for a full term. Mr. Brown stated, I think I need
your blessing to have a full term, and I hope you give that to me.  He stated that he would follow
up with a letter to Council President Scott and that he hoped that all the commissioners give a
favorable recommendation for him to do a full term. Mr. Brown explained that he has not missed
a meeting or conference, that he has done everything asked of him, that Director Lonnie Douglas
of the Human Rights Commission is happy with his performance, and that City Attorney
Aladean DeRose gave him a recommendation, as well. He hoped that the Council would bless
him with a full term. 

Jesse Davis, P. O.  Box 10205,  South Bend, IN, was curious about a new facade going on Main
Street Row. Mr. Davis stated, I' m just kind of curious on how we decide where we' re tossing
400,000 for fagades,  because there are a lot of fagades along the Smart Streets corridor that are
in worse shape than that building was. He stated that he wanted to know who made this
determination, and noted that he did not recall this coming up at a previous Council meeting. Mr. 
Davis wanted to know where the money came from and who determined where it should be
spent. He stated, I saw that Great Lakes Capital owns the building. There seem to be a lot of ties
between Great Lakes Capital and Bradley Management Group ... things of that nature. He stated
that there were many unknowns regarding this transaction of —what he assumed to be —tax
dollars. 

Sharon Banicki,  3822 Ford Street,  South Bend, IN, thanked Councilmember Dr. Varner for
helping on Election Day, stating that it was deeply appreciated. Ms. Banicki stated,  I have an
internet address for you. I know the budget clock starts early, and there was some question as to
where I got some of my figures during the last budget talks. It' s actually on the State of Indiana
website. It' s gatewayinfoonline.org. It has everybody that' s paid by any public entity on there. 
Ms. Banicki explained that she was able to see how much everyone on the Council is paid. She
continued,  stating, When people come asking for these outrageous and outlandish raises next
year, use this as a resource so that you can see that the other cities are not paying what you' ve
been led to believe. 

Becky Reimbold, 1127 East Bronson Street,  South Bend, IN, stated that she wanted to first
express gratitude to the Councilmembers, the staff, the caring community members present, and
to the developer and designers and architects who have chosen to invest in South Bend. She
stated, My family and I have invested in our home neighborhood and also in the East Bank
Village. Four (4)  years ago,  we purchased the building at 714 East Jefferson, where I have
operated my business for the last six years. We are also founding member owners of the Purple
Porch Coop, at 123 North Hill Street. We, along with other business people and residents in the
neighborhood that I have spoken with, are invested in this concept of a village atmosphere on the
east side of the river —an area distinct from, but connected to, the Central Downtown. We are
concerned about the height and the mass of the proposed Commerce Center project. And while
we understand that density is important, that large -scale grocery and pharmacy are desirable in
the Downtown area, the original zoning guidelines in that East Bank Village Plan are well - 
crafted and they should be followed. They represent a shared vision and many hours of careful
work by experts and stakeholders in the process.  This plan is not out -of -date and, in fact, it has
been referenced by the City multiple times over the past three ( 3)  years,  in relation to other
development projects in the neighborhood. The City has already agreed to increase the original
sixty (60)  foot maximum allowable height to seventy -five (75)  feet for the Wharf property and
then further to ninety -six (96)  feet for the Niles and Jefferson property. Allowing a highrise will

21

REGULAR MEETING

NOVEMBER 28.  2016

set a precedent for the neighborhood. PUDs are permanent changes,  in relation to the restrictions
on a property. And furthermore, adjacent property owners, due to those exceptions, would be
able to present a valid legal argument to, also build to that height. Please keep the maximum
allowable height between the original sixty (60)  feet and the recent compromise of ninety -six
96)  while working with Matthews LLC —and any other developers —to find plans that work in
that neighborhood for everyone. Ms. Reimbold thanked the Council for hearing all -the positions
on this matter. 

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business to come before the Council, President Tim Scott adjourned the
meeting at 9: 33] 2. m. 

22

