REPORT OF SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

TO THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND: 

THE SUB - COMMITTEE HAS INSPECTED THE MINUTES OF THE

December 12th, 2016 and January 2nd 2017

MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL AND FOUND THEM TO BE CORRECT. 

THEREFORE, WE RECOMMEND THE SAME BE APPROVED: 

TIM SCOT

TT

Z

MXVID VARNER

APPROVED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL ON: 

January 9th, 2016

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend, Indiana met in the
Council Chambers of the County -City Building on Monday, December 12,  2016 at 7: 00 p.m. 
The meeting was called to order by Council President Tim Scott and the Invocation by Reverend
Rick Jackson of the Olivet African Methodist Episcopal Church and Pledge to the Flag was

given. 

ROLL CALL

COUNCIL MEMBERS: 

Tim Scott
Regina Williams- Preston
Randy Kelly
Josephine Broden
Dr. David Varner
Oliver J.  Davis
John Voorde
Gavin Ferlic
Karen L. White

OTHERS PRESENT: 

Kareemah Fowler
Jennifer Coffman
Alkeyna Aldridge
Michael Passavoir
Aladean De Rose
Adriana Rodriguez

1St District, President
2nd District
3rd District
4th District
5th District
6th District, Vice President
At -Large
At- Large, Chairperson Committee of the Whole
At -Large

City Clerk
Chief Deputy Clerk
Deputy Clerk
Executive Assistant Clerk
Interim Council Attorney
Legal Research Assistant

REPORT FROM THE SUB - COMMITTEE ON MINUTES

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion that the minutes of the November 28th,  2016
meeting of the Council be accepted and placed on file. Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded
the motion which carried by a voice vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

SPECIAL BUSINESS

Councilmember Tim Scott announced that the Historic Preservation Commission' s appeal
process would be continued until January 23,  2017; Bill No. 66 -16 on water rates is continued to
January 9th,  2017; Bill No.  16 -85 Portage Prairie, Bill No.  16 -89 Coveleski project, and Bill No. 
16 -90 Councilmember Oliver Davis'  resolution on neighborhood plans are all set for January
2017 as well. 

Councilmember Scott announced that members of Boy Scout Troop 111 were present,  asking
them to please stand. 

BILL NO. 

16 -92

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, 

PUBLICLY CONGRATULATING AND

APPLAUDING ACTOR AND PERFORMER RJ

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

WALKER FOR HIS ACCOMPLISHMENTS IN
THE ACTING INDUSTRY

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston, 838 North Elmer Street, South Bend, IN, served as
presenter of this bill. She invited RJ Walker and his family to the podium. Councilmember
Williams- Preston stated that there had been a multimedia presentation prepared for the evening, 
but that it could not be shown due to technical difficulty. A still shot of a commercial Mr. Walker
acted in was presented to the Council and public. Councilmember Williams- Preston encouraged
those present to watch the commercial at their leisure. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston then began to read the resolution before the Council and the
public until she realized that she had in her hand the wrong version of the resolution. She asked
to read the proper version of the resolution. 

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to accept Substitute Bill No.  16 -92. Councilmember
Dr. David Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of nine (9)  ayes. 

Councilmember Williams - Preston subsequently read the correct version of the resolution. 

At this time, Mr. Walker and his family were given an opportunity to speak to the Council and

public. 

RJ Walker greeted everyone, stating, First off. what' s up? Honestly, I' m going to be real right
now, real transparent. Everything I' m saying is real,  so it' s not a fagade or anything. Ten ( 10) 
minutes ago, I was getting cold feet, and I didn' t even know if I was the right guy for this. For
the past few months, I doubted myself constantly, and I consistently told myself that I don' t
know if I' m the right guy. But after hearing Regina restate what I told her that I went through, 
and seeing my family here, and I look at the news, and I come home once every year and I still
see shootings often —it' s kind of humbling to see that I can stand as a beacon of light. It' s not a
me"  thing. I feel like I' m just a vessel for it all. It' s not an " RJ Walker" thing. That' s just a
name. But I just feel honored. I' m blessed to see that people like Tim Scott, or any of you
people, would even look at me in this light. I' m a mess,  I am. I am!  And I admit it. But I' m just
really happy to be here. It' s unreal. Everything that' s happened is unreal, and I thank everyone. 
I' m sorry I' m tearing up, it' s just the emotions got the best of me. Thank you, guys. Just thank

you so much. 

Joanne Walker, mother of RJ Walker, residing in South Bend, IN, came up to the podium to
speak, expressing gratitude for the honor her son was receiving. 

Serena Walker, sister of RJ Walker, residing in South Bend, IN, came up to the podium to speak, 
recounting memories of her brother that illustrated clearly that Mr. Walker was the right man
chosen for this resolution. 

Randall Walker Sr., father of RJ Walker, residing in South Bend, IN, came up to the podium to
speak, expressing great pride in his son' s development and achievements, as well as explaining
that Mr. Walker was a young man who was always striving to reach his goals. 

Those from the public wishing to speak in favor of the bill: 

Samuel Brown, 222 Navarre Street, South Bend, IN, stated that he did not know Mr. Walker but
that he was touched by his words. He encouraged Mr. Walker to put his faith in God and to keep
the work up. 

Jonathan Jones, residing in South Bend, IN, stated that he has known Mr. Walker for some time, 
having previously worked at both Bethel College and IUSB. He stated that he always felt that
Mr. Walker had a great light, that he was a great person. He hired him into a mentoring program, 
where he always brought a lot of excitement. He expressed pride in Mr. Walker and was glad to
see him be acknowledged. 

The Councilmembers were given the floor to comment on the bill. Each one offered a brief word
of congratulations and encouragement to Mr. Walker, as well as thanks for the honor he has
brought to the City with his growing body of work. 

2

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Mr. Walker presented a framed certificate in honor of the Boys &  Girls Club, paying homage to
them. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to adopt Bill No.  16 -92 and Councilmember Dr. 
David Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

REPORTS OF CITY OFFICES

Representing the City Administration: 

James Mueller, Chief of Staff

Suzanna Fritzberg, Deputy Chief of Staff

RESOLVE INTO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

At 7: 28 p.m. Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to resolve into the Committee of the
Whole. Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of
nine ( 9)  ayes.  Councilmember Gavin Ferlic,  Chairperson, presiding. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic explained the procedures to be followed for tonight' s meeting in
accordance with Article 1,  Section 2 -11 of the South Bend Municipal Code. 

PUBLIC HEARINGS

73 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF

THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA, AMENDING

CHAPTER 2,  ARTICLE 14 OF THE SOUTH

BEND MUNICIPAL CODE TO ESTABLISH

VARIOUS NEW FUNDS:  LOCAL ROAD AND

BRIDGE MATCHING GRANT FUND (265), 

EQUIPMENTNEHICLE LEASING FUND ( 750), 

PARKS BOND CAPITAL FUND ( 751),  SOUTH

BEND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FUND

752),  SMART STREETS BOND CAPITAL

FUND ( 753),  INDUSTRIAL REVOLVING FUND

754),  SOUTH BEND BUILDING

CORPORATION FUND ( 755),  SMART STREETS
DEBT SERVICE FUND ( 756),  PARKS BOND
DEBT SERVICE FUND ( 757),  THE ERSKINE

VILLAGE DEBT SERVICE FUND (758),  AND

CHANGING THE NAME OF FUND 279 TO THE

IT /INNOVATION /311 CALL CENTER FUND. 

Councilmember Karen White,  Chair of the Personnel and Finance Committee, reported that they
met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

John Murphy, City Controller with offices on the 12th Floor of the County -City Building, stated
that this ordinance establishes eleven ( 11)  new funds for the City. Mr. Murphy stated, During the
budget process, we talked about nine ( 9)  new funds regarding trustee accounts that we have
always included in our audit report, and it has always been audited and counted for properly. 
They never were fully integrated into our accounting system or our budgeting. As a result, we are
dealing with those nine ( 9)  funds. In addition, the State of Indiana requires a new fund for any
government applying for the Indiana Crossings Grant program. That' s Fund 265.  So if we
receive that grant, we will deposit it in that fund and that' s when we will spend it. We will have
an appropriation in the first quarter, likely, to clean up that fund. The 311 Call Center fund, 
which we had in place for 2016, has been revised in its name to fully recognize the new

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

integrated IT Innovations 311 Call Center activities. So,  all of those activities are in one fund. As
discussed in Committee, there are separate divisions in each fund, so you kind of keep track of
the cost of each division of the fund. 

No one from the public wished to speak in favor of or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner made a motion that Bill No. 73 -16 be sent to the full Council
with a favorable recommendation. Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which
carried by a voice vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

74 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, APPROPRIA'T' ING
ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR CERTAIN

DEPARTMENTAL AND ENTERPRISE
OPERATIONS IN 2016 OF $ 220, 000 FROM
CONSOLIDATED BUILDING FUND ( #600), 

120, 000 FROM SOLID WASTE FUND ( #610), 
5, 000 FROM WATER WORKS CUSTOMER

DEPOSIT FUND (#624),$ 4, 000 FROM WATER
WORKS SINKING FUND (# 625),$ 5, 000 FROM
WATER WORKS BOND RESERVE FUND

626), $ 11, 000 FROM WATER WORKS DEBT
RESERVE O &M FUND (#629),$ 45, 000 FROM
SEWER INSURANCE FUND (#640),$ 22, 000
FROM SEWAGE WORKS O &M RESERVE
FUND ( #643), $ 5 FROM 2015 SEWER BOND
ISSUANCE FUND ( #666),  AND $346, 506 FROM
CENTURY CENTER FUND ( #670). 

Councilmember Karen White, Chair of the Personnel and Finance Committee, reported that they
met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

John Murphy, City Controller with offices on the 12th Floor of the County -City Building, stated
that it has been the practice of the City to amend the budget quarterly, so this amendment
proposed was the final one for the year. Mr. Murphy stated, We went through the list of
enterprise government amendments earlier at Committee, so I will not repeat everything here. 
Several of these are small —those relating to the earning interest in the fund, which has been a
little higher than in the prior year in the transferring of additional funds. The Century Center
appropriation is for more activity. Both expenditures and revenue are higher this year than
originally budgeted, so we are pleased with that. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis asked if this ordinance was concerned with the South Bend Police
Department at all. It was clarified for him that that issue would be brought up in a later bill. 

No one from the public wished to speak in favor of or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion that Bill No. 74 -16 be sent to the full Council with
a favorable recommendation. Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which carried
by a voice vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

75 -16

4

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, FOR BUDGET
TRANSFERS FOR VARIOUS DEPARTMENTS
WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 
INDIANA FOR THE YEAR 2016

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to accept Substitute Bill No. 75 -16.  Councilmember
Tim Scott seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of nine (9)  ayes. 

Councilmember Karen White, Chair of the Personnel and Finance Committee, reported that they
met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

John Murphy, City Controller with offices on the 12th Floor of the County -City Building, stated
that the City also does budget transfers on a quarterly basis, so these were the final set of
transfers for the year. Mr. Murphy stated, Transfers don' t represent the appropriations, rather
they represent reclassifications of a budget from an ' 81 department in the same fund to another
department in the same fund, or from an account category like supplies to services within the
same fund. There are four (4)  pages of those.  We are trying to take a lot of pride in making sure
all of our accounts are balanced at the end of the year. 

No one from the public wished to speak in favor of or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion that Bill No.  75 -16 be sent to the full Council with
a favorable recommendation. Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion which carried
by a voice vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

76 -16

PUBLIC HEARING ON AN ORDINANCE OF

THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, APPROPRIATING

ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR CERTAIN

DEPARTMENTAL AND CITY SERVICES
OPERATIONS IN 2016 OF $ 364, 100 FROM

GENERAL FUND ( #101), $ 25, 000 FROM

UNSAFE BUILDING FUND ( #219), $ 25, 000

FROM LOCAL ROADS &  STREETS FUND

251), $ 150, 000 FROM LOIT 2016 SPECIAL

DISTRIBUTION FUND ( #257), $ 10, 000 FROM

INDIANA RIVER RESCUE FUND ( #291), 

212, 542 FROM COPS MORE GRANT FUND

295),$ 150, 000 FROM COUNTY OPTION

INCOME TAX FUND ( #404)  AND $ 100, 000

FROM PARKS NONREVERTING CAPITAL

FUND ( #405). 

Councilmember Karen White, Chair of the Personnel and Finance Committee,  reported that they
met and send this bill forward with a favorable recommendation. 

John Murphy, City Controller with offices on the 12th Floor of the County -City Building, stated
that these are the additional appropriations for the Civil City funds, which are all of the funds
other than TIF or enterprise funds. Mr. Murphy stated, We went through the list at Committee, 
this afternoon. Addressing Councilmember Davis, he stated, The camera appropriation that is
included— that' s under the Cops More Grant. Ken Glowacki from the Police Department is here
to answer any questions that you may have.  Continuing on with his presentation, Mr. Murphy
stated, So,  going to the list —one is related to the COIT for additional funds for flood repairs
which will be reimbursed through the insurance.  We are in the process of filing a claim for that. 

Councilmember Davis asked, When will all the South Bend Police cars have the new cameras
put inside of them, based on the finances that are here? 

Ken Glowacki, Director of Finance,  South Bend Police Department, stated that he did not know
the final date. Mr. Glowacki stated,  It is going to be a lengthy process,  but as the equipment
comes in, and we can rotate cars off the street and get them replaced— again, I' m not sure
exactly, because it will be throughout most of next year that this process will be taking place. 

Councilmember Davis asked, You said that there are some new ones coming in? 

5

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Mr. Glowacki responded,  The $ 212,000 — $172, 000 of that deals with buying cameras for new
cars just received. The difference is going to be used as part of the money with the General Fund
to replace cameras in the older cars. 

No one from the public wished to speak in favor of or opposition to the bill. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion that Bill No. 76 -16 be sent to the full Council with
a favorable recommendation. Councilmember Karen White seconded the motion which carried
by a voice vote of nine (9)  ayes. 

CONTINUED IN COUNCIL PORTION ONLY. 

41 -16

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING
ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED AT
401 EAST COLFAX AVENUE, 228 &  230
SYCAMORE STREET, &  312 LASALLE
AVENUE, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 4
IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember Oliver Davis, Chair of the Zoning and Annexation Committee,  reported that
they met and send this bill forward with no recommendation. 

Councilmembers Dr. Varner, White, and Davis discussed the fact that Council had received a
letter from the Mayor addressing this bill and agreed that it should be part of the record and read
to the public. 

Chairperson Gavin Ferlic explained the format of the proceedings,  stating that each
Councilmember would be granted two (2)  questions to be asked of subject matter experts. After
each Councilmember, starting with Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston, finished their line
of questioning, the floor would be opened up for Councilmembers to ask an unlimited number of
further questions. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston opted to defer questioning to the following round. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly opted to defer questioning to the following round. 

Councilmember Jo Broden asked Rob Bartels, What is your commitment with regard to this
project, in terms of your lease agreement and understanding of the market feasibility and
readiness for you to enter the market in downtown South Bend? 

Rob Bartels, Martin' s Supermarket, 760 West Cotter St.,  South Bend, IN, explained that he did
not have a signed lease due to the fact that fundamentals that would require Council approval
were not yet in place. Addressing the question of market feasibility, Mr. Bartels explained that
Martin' s Supermarket has been around for seventy (70)  years and therefore knows the City well. 
They have looked at big data to determine market demographics for South Bend. He stated,  The
tricky part about a downtown location for us is that it requires a greater population density than
we currently have. The confluence of this project answers parking, it answers density, and it
answers momentum in terms of market trends over time. 

Councilmember Broden asked,  With regard to an urban market footprint versus either of the
other projects that you are involved in with Regional Cities,  or existing markets —how will this
market differ in terms of square footage required and layout? 

Mr. Bartels responded, This is a pretty radical departure for us. He explained that Martin' s is
involved in projects in downtown Elkhart and the south side of Goshen that are similar to this
one.  The Goshen project has a 25, 000 square foot footprint, which is similar in size to the current
project, though in a much different configuration. He stated, We as an organization are learning
how to be small again. There is a great deal of learning that' s going on right now. We just
opened a convenience store on the west side of town, and we' re working with a couple of other

0

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

projects' that will get us into a more niche kind of environment. It' s pretty simple: when you
shrink a business model like this down to this degree, you have to be very careful with resources. 
Our industry is something less than two percent (2 %)  net profit before taxes since the Recession. 
That has not changed.  That means that we have to be careful stewards of what we' re doing, but
we also understand how to adapt, and we are learning a great deal from the things that we are
doing. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner asked Interim Council Attorney Aladean De Rose if, in the case of
this bill passing and Council modifying the proposal, this process would be the equivalent of an
offer - counteroffer whereby, as modified, it would then return for negotiations. 

Interim Council Attorney De Rose responded, If it' s modified and the modification is accepted,  it
is in writing. It becomes a part of it. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner responded,  But it can also lead to an offer - counteroffer

circumstance —or not. 

Interim Council Attorney De Rose responded, Or not. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner asked, Depending on how it' s written? 

Interim Council Attorney De Rose responded,  Depends on how it' s written. If it' s written as a
commitment, then the commitment is saved,  and that commitment is adopted as a substitute with

an amendment motion. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner stated, What I would like to find is a resolution this evening, if we
can, on a continuation of a continuation of a continuation. So, would you help us if we need
specific language to accomplish that? 

Interim Council Attorney De Rose confirmed that she could. 

Councilmember Ferlic, addressing Marcellus Lebbin, stated,  Some on the Council and other
individuals have argued that the ABZA is the appropriate body to hear a request like this. Why, 
in your opinion, is the Council the appropriate body to hear a consideration like this? 

Marcellus Lebbin, 4100 Edison Lakes Parkway, Mishawaka, IN, responded, Under Indiana law, 
you are the zoning authority for the City of South Bend. The ABZA is a board with appointees
from the City of Mishawaka, the County, and the City of South Bend. If all of your zoning
requests like this were to run through the ABZA, you would essentially be giving veto power to
the County and City of Mishawaka, which is obviously not something you want. The way the
system is currently set up,  if something runs through the ABZA and gets denied, it comes to you
and you can overrule the denial.  You are the ultimate zoning authority. You have the ability to
go forth and approve PUDs. Projects of this magnitude,  of this scale are what the PUD statute
was intended for when it was written by the State. That is why we are here today. 

Councilmember Ferlic, addressing Dave Matthews, requested that Mr. Matthews talk about his
process moving forward, if this successfully passes.  He also asked him if there was a
commitment to attempting to acquire other portions of the parcel,  to work with the neighbors to
potentially reduce the overall height. 

Dave Matthews, 215 E.  Colfax Ave., South Bend, IN, stated that Matthews LLC does the
development that they do because they love South Bend. Mr. Matthews stated,  We are trying to
make the City better. We are trying to do what' s right for the neighborhood. This is our home — 
this is the place we care about. I think if you look at our past buildings, they show that we care
about the neighbors. There are requests from some of the neighbors to make the building shorter. 
We have worked with experts hired by the City from Washington D.C.,  we have in -house
designers, we have consultants that we use outside of our company to try and figure out the best
way to move forward. But we have to design within the land we own. Now, there are discussions
about me buying more property on the block —it hasn' t happened yet. If it does happen, then
yeah, I' m definitely willing to talk and say that we come back and revisit the design and say that
we don' t have to build it so tall, we can build next door. And if I do buy that land, I' m happy to
work with the City and say, " Hey, this additional parcel is in play. Here' s what we are thinking, 
instead. What do you guys think? How do we move forward ?" But, there' s a lot of uncertainty

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

there, as well. We want to do what' s right for the neighborhood and we are going to do what' s
best. If they came back and said that they were ready to go, and if some of the other parcel
owners on the block said that they were happy to sell it at a reasonable price, then I could
definitely understand making the building shorter. Because it' s a PUD, it would probably have to
come back through this process for a significant change.  We would work with planners, we
would work with Community Investment, and tell them what we need and ask what they want to
see.  We want to do what' s right for the neighborhood, what' s right for the City. I live a few
blocks away. I walked here tonight. This is our neighborhood. We care. 

Councilmember Davis requested that James Mueller read Mayor Pete Buttigieg' s letter regarding
compromises on the Commerce Center PUD. 

James Mueller, Mayor' s Office Chief of Staff, with offices on the 14th Floor of the County -City
Building, read the Mayor' s letter which is on file with the Office of the City Clerk, accessible in
the flat file of Bill No. 41 - 16 as " Mayor Buttigieg Letter to Council." 

Councilmember Davis asked Mr. Mueller if he would share the name of the D.C.  consultant and
what their recommendation for this project was. 

Mr. Mueller stated, The consultant Mr. Matthews referenced earlier from D.C.  is Torti Gallas. 
Torti Gallas looked at the existing land that Mr. Matthews owned and basically said —well, there
weren' t a lot of options, but I will bring Jitin to speak further to the conclusions. 

Jitin Kain, Director of Department of Public Works, with offices on the 13th Floor of the County - 
City Building, stated that he was tasked with trying to find a reasonable compromise to the
proposal offered by the developer. He stated, We consulted with Torti Gallas and Partners'  urban
design firm that has done work in South Bend in the past. The West Side Main Streets plan was
developed by Torti Gallas. They' re known not only for doing design planning work but also for
building projects. They are actively involved in a lot of residential Mixed -Use projects. We
worked with them over the last few days.  They understood the program. They had conversations
with the developer. Their key suggestion was to balance the program onto the entire site. Given
the constraints of the project, they felt the best approach would be to try and look a little more
horizontally as opposed to vertically. They suggested breaking the project into three ( 3)  different
buildings, with the project being phased -in. The first couple of buildings could be on LaSalle and
the second phase would be on Colfax. The proposal they offered also reduced the height to about
one - hundred and thirty (13 0)  feet, or one - hundred and twenty -seven ( 127)  feet. They offered
options for certain buildings being taller than others,  so that there was variation in height. Much
of the proposal seemed to be heading in the direction of the compromise that we were seeking, 
except the challenge was site control. The proposal was contingent on having site control of the
Fire Arts building and the AEP substation to make that entire program happen. We engaged with
AEP in conversation. They have a mandate by their governing body to overhaul that substation, 
but that deadline is the middle of the year in 2019. The developer was seeking site control, 
earliest, by next year. AEP was willing to offer a letter of intent, saying, " We intend to work with
the developer on this, however we could not come to a decision on having site control by next
year."  I think that seemed to be the sticking issue. We tried to work on a compromise. The
proposal offered seemed unfeasible,  in the end. 

Councilmember John Voorde opted to defer questioning to the following round. 

Councilmember Tim Scott, addressing Mr. Matthews and Mr. Mueller, stated, If I' m looking at
the options that were presented to us by Mr. Matthews, there' s an Option B that is eleven ( 11) 
stories, where zero ( 0)  money is put in by the City versus, according to the letter, nine (9)  stories
with a minimum of $4, 100, 000 from the City. If I' m looking at this correctly, according to the
letter, it' s an option that the Mayor has put on the table. Does this work for both the City and the
developer? I' ll start with the developer. 

Mr. Matthews asked,  For which option? 

Councilmember Scott responded, Option B.  Looks like eleven ( 11)  stories, zero ( 0)  money in
from the City. 

Mr. Matthews responded, That option still works for us, yes. 

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Scott called Mr. Mueller up to the podium. 

Mr. Mueller stated, It is not our first preference, but it does work for the City, and there is no
other option on Mr. Matthews'  sheet that works for the City, financially. 

Councilmember Scott responded, Because of the upfront money from the City? 

Mr. Mueller responded,  Because of the upfront money from the City, correct. 

A brief discussion between Councilmembers Davis and Scott, Mr. Matthews, and Clerk Fowler
ensued over whether the public had access to a letter that Mr. Matthews had submitted listing
four options for the PUD project. Clerk Fowler and Mr. Matthews confirmed for the Council and
public that the letter was accessible through the City Dropbox on the City website. 

Councilmember Scott, addressing Mr. Bartels and Mr. Matthews,  asked, How many jobs will
this building bring to the City? 

Mr. Bartels responded,  Our part of it is something in the neighborhood of forty (40)  plus or
minus ten ( 10).  So, thirty (30)  to fifty (50),  but it depends on full- time /part-time. It depends on
how robustly things go. 

Mr. Matthews responded, We will probably have somewhere around three ( 3)  to seven ( 7)  full - 
time equivalents added for this building for both leasing management and property management. 

Councilmember White, addressing Mr. Matthews,  stated, I want to make sure,  in terms of the
December 12,  2016 letter that we received from the Mayor —the Administration had developed
or offered two (2)  options:  A and B.  Of these options,  none of them will work for you, is that
what you' re saying? What we have before us, that James just read. 

Mr. Matthews responded, You' re talking about two (2)  different options. 

Councilmember White responded, Two ( 2)  different options. 

Mr. Matthews explained, One ( 1)  was option D, as in David

Councilmember White interjected, Well, I' m looking at the letter that we have. 

Mr. Matthews responded, Right. The first option of their preference was my Option D, from the
five (5)  different proposals which was a one - hundred and twenty -seven ( 127)  foot tall building at
the curb, but we can' t pay for the garage with only a hundred and forty -seven ( 147)  units.  So,  the
City offered $ 1, 500, 000 to that to buy some land and help pay for the garage, but our deficit was
4, 700, 000,  so the $ 1, 500, 000 didn' t get us there.  So that option would not work, but then their
second one was my Option B,  which was to reduce the height to eleven ( 11)  stories instead of
twelve ( 12),  and that would still give us enough money with the tax abatement to pay for the
garage. 

Councilmember White asked, In light of what you have heard,  and the height being one of the
major concerns —by reducing by one ( 1)  story, what impact would that have on you financially? 

Mr. Matthews responded, It saves us $ 5, 000,000. We spend $5, 000,000 less.  It costs us twenty - 
four (24)  apartments, so it' s probably costing us $ 500,000 to $600,000 dollars a year in revenue, 
and then it probably saves us $ 80, 000 a year in property taxes that we would not have to pay
because our building would be cheaper. 

Councilmember Broden asked if the format of questioning could be modified, as she felt that two
2)  questions per Councilmember did not allow the Council to appropriately question a given
subject matter expert. 

Chairperson Gavin Ferlic proposed that if one Councilmember asks a question to a particular

subject matter expert, they can ask an unlimited number of questions to them,  and should any
other Councilmember want to ask questions of that same subject matter expert, any number of
Councilmembers may ask questions to them until said Councilmembers are satisfied.  Once a
subject matter expert has been totally questioned, the Council can the move on to questioning the
next expert. 

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Williams- Preston, addressing Mr. Matthews,  stated, You had mentioned that
you would be willing to work with neighbors and have already been working with neighbors,  and
one of the big issues that neighbors were concerned about was the height. It is my understanding
that several months ago,  there was a recommendation by the Area Plan Commission, I think, that
you look at possibly going back to that East Bank Plan. You and I have had this conversation, 
too. I have concerns about making a decision that goes so far outside a plan that was created by
people in the community. The issue is that business plans,  in my mind, should not trump or
supersede neighborhood plans.  Can you clarify for me, maybe again, what was your reasoning
behind not pursuing that line per the recommendation? That line of —let' s go back, let' s talk to
neighbors, let' s get some other consensus at that time. 

Mr. Matthews responded,  So,  as a private developer, we met with the neighborhood organization
for this area, the Howard Park Neighborhood Organization. We presented. We had dialogue. 
They gave a letter of support. We met with neighbors from the townhomes and row houses that
have gone up.  So,  we worked with the homeowners associations of the new development, we
worked the neighborhood organization for the entire neighborhood, and had a lot of conversation
and dialogue as we were presenting and brought them through the design process.  To update the
East Bank Plan, I don' t think as a private developer I can do that. I think that has to come from
the City, probably via the Area Plan Commission or the Department of Community Investment. 
So, they have to do anew study. I' ll be there,  and I' m sure a lot of neighbors will be there, too. 
But, from a private developer standpoint, I think we went above and beyond and met with as
many neighbors in the eight (8)  or nine ( 9)  blocks of the East Bank that we could. 

Councilmember Broden stated,  So,  Mr. Matthews, at the very start of this process, pursuant
through the Planned Unit Development district ordinance that was passed by this Council in
2015 —there are two criteria that get to whether or not this is the type of petition that we should
is Section A3,  and it says, " The PUD District is not intended for
be seeing as a Council. One ( 1) 
developments seeking release from development standards within a district in which the use is
permitted. The height that you' re requesting, is that not a development standard for this district
that you' re trying to build in? 

Mr. Matthews responded,  The intent of the PUD is that they don' t want somebody using the
PUD to, let' s say,  get to do a variance process instead of going through the ABZA. If we were
just talking about height and nothing else, then yes, that would be wrong. But we' re not talking
about just height. We have a site plan, we have a Mixed -Use building, we have group
residencies — that' s an additional use.  There' s now a path that somebody could use to go through
the ABZA to get a group residency, but when we did the original planning for this site, you could
not have three ( 3)  people living together in a three ( 3)  bedroom apartment. There was no way to
make it happen in the Central Business District. We knew that, down the road, the City Council
might make a path for people to have two (2)  or three ( 3)  roommates in the downtown. But when
we were doing our planning, when we submitted the application, that was talk —and there was
dialogue going on —but no one had talked to me about it. I know that was a piece of legislation
you actually worked on. But again, nobody talked to me. We just heard rumors that this was
going to happen eventually. So, when we did the application, the only option we had was to do a
Planned Unit Development and keep a lot of the stuff intact in the Central Business District, or
do a Mixed -Use Development, which has more restrictive heights and —it' s not really designed
with part of the Central Business District. So,  it made more sense for us to do the PUD. 
Honestly, Eddy Street Commons is a PUD. PUD' s give the Council a lot more information and a
lot more control about what' s going to happen. So,  for a $ 50, 000,000 development, it seemed
like the right path was to come to City Council and say, " Here' s our cards,  here' s what we' re
thinking of doing, here' s what it' s going to look like, here' s the site layout. What do you think ?" 
Because that was a portion that was changing, that gets thrown into whether or not you guys
approve the PUD. 

Councilmember Broden responded,  So if I could follow up on that. At the time that you
presented this petition in the initial planning meeting with the Area Plan Commission staff, all of
the uses that you sought then or that you are seeking now did exist by rezoning this to a Mixed - 
Use district. Is that true? 

10

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Mr. Matthews responded, They existed in Mixed -Use, they existed in Sing -Fro. The group
residency existed in Mixed -Use. 

Councilmember Broden asked, Then why did you not pursue that route, please? 

Mr. Matthews responded,  It also existed in Single - Family, it also existed in Multi- Family. 
There' s other districts that would have allowed group residency. We had our choice to pick what
makes the most sense for what we' re applying for. And for us doing the PUD that' s very similar
to the Central Business District made more sense than getting a Mixed -Use zoning and then
saying here' s all the variances from Mixed -Use to make it more like the Central Business
District. Either route would have been okay, but it seemed like the PUD was the right way to go, 
and it gives the City Council more discretion and more influence on the rezoning process. This is
a big project. I think you guys deserve to have more influence and more say, if this goes forward. 
Especially, in hindsight, because the height issue became such a topic of conversation. I' m glad
we went this route. 

Councilmember Broden responded, But, isn' t that exactly the loophole that when Council had
passed your previous project at Jefferson and Nilesthat went through the ABZA, and of course
that was denied. Then, you brought it forth to the Council to make that decision. You brought it
by way of a PUD request. And then after that process —and it was approved by Council —there
was an intentional move by the Council to make this Planned Unit Development the exception
rather than the rule, going forward. And it specifically listed two (2)  criteria, with the help of
Area Plan Staff. "The PUD District is not intended for developments seeking relief from
development standards within a district in which the use is permitted,"  and then, " The PUD
District is not intended for the development of residential subdivisions, Permitted Uses,  or
Special Exception Uses which are provided for within any district of this Ordinance."  So,  it
seems to me that you are back again —are you not back again asking for a similar approval from
us as a Council, having already closed this as an option for you? In other words, I' m trying to get
at the validity of this as a PUD request. 

Mr. Matthews responded, I just want to make sure I understand. Is the question, " Is this a valid

PUD request ?" 

Councilmember Broden responded,  Yes. 

Mr. Matthews responded,  Great. Yes, it is. Maybe I can bring in the attorney who is a State rep
who helped draft legislation. Bryan, can you help answer this question for me? If you' re asking if
it is legally a request, I think it is. It made it through the process thus far, but Bryan can
probably— 

Bryan Dvorak, 215 West North Shore Drive, South Bend, IN, stated that he has represented Mr. 
Matthews on various matters. Mr. Dvorak stated,  We' ve worked on all sorts of building projects
around town. We' ve had discussion with some of the planning people about when a PUD
application is appropriate. Last year, I think it was August of 2015,  the ordinance was updated, 
and it included the intents section that Councilmember Broden read. I think, as Mr. Matthews
mentioned, his intent was not to circumvent one of the requirements in the zoning law. His intent
was to present a Planned Unit Development. As a larger project, I think as Councilmember
Broden mentioned, we talked about an exceptional type of project. This is a $ 50, 000,000,  Mixed - 
Use, two - hundred and forty (240)  residential units on top of a grocery, pharmacy,  along the East
Race in the Central Business District. And with a parking garage.  It is not a normal project. It' s
going to take a long time to construct. It' s going to take a lot of money to pull together, and it
will have a major impact on the town. That is the reason the State adopted the Planned Unit
Development statute to begin with, to try to find an easier way to do planning for these types of
major projects. We have general funds in place for the Renaissance District over in the
Studebaker building. AmeriPlex was a PUD. Eddy Street Commons is a PUD. They could have
been zoned in other ways as well. The PUD statute and the ordinance that the City adopted as
well makes it an easier process, both for the developer —so they can make sure they have all their
components in a line when they are going to get their financing done and when we' re lining up
contractors —but really also for the City. A major complex project like this, I think it' s in the
City' s interest to basically have all these details spelled out ahead of time. The PUD gives you, 
as the Council, the ability to say that you want to know how every single component of this

11

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

project is going to work, and that' s how the PUD statute and the ordinance actually is created. I
don' t think it at all violates the intent clause of the PUD ordinance because I don' t think the
intent behind applying for it as a PUD was to circumvent any of their zoning regulations. Does
that answer the question? 

Councilmember Broden responded, Sure.  So,  let' s distinguish the Eddy Street Commons, if we
would. That is a mix of all kinds of different uses and a large swath of land, and it preceded the
2015 amendment, if I' m correct. 

Mr. Dvorak stated,  Right. 

Councilmember Broden continued, stating, And then with regard to the Renaissance District — 
sorry, I can' t remember my notes on that. So really, again, it' s trying to get to whether this is
appropriate post the 2015 amendments that this Council passed 9 -0.  Everybody is excited about
the development. The big question here is the height, and it continues to be morphed in all kinds
of different proposals.  I guess I' m just wondering why it did not go the route of the ABZA, 
because to me that should have been the route for this particular project. 

Mr. Dvorak responded, The question is whether or not this is prohibited under the City ordinance
on Planned Unit Developments based on the intent clause of the ordinance? 

Councilmember Broden responded, The criteria —yeah, yeah, the intent. 

it' s not intended for residential subdivisions;  and then

Mr. Dvorak continued,  stating, This is sort of an exercise in statutory construction, I guess,  so we
can sort of look at this.  Subsection A of Article 5 of the Planned Unit Development District —it
has three ( 3)  parts.  The first one talks about what the district is intended to do.  It talks about
establishing compatible and efficient mix of land uses and open space;  compatibility with the
Comprehensive Plan; establishing a creative approach in building design through architectural
compatibility; flexibility and incentives for development; and any individual land or combination
of land uses otherwise not specified elsewhere in the Ordinance.  So,  that' s the intent, and then it
has two (2)  conditions on that. One ( 1), 
permitted uses,  special exception uses;  and then the third one is, " The PUD District is not
intended for developments seeking relief from development standards within a district in which
the use is permitted."  So,  that' s the intent of the statute.  That describes what the intent of it is, 
but it actually doesn' t carry any force of the law, because what the statute actually does is
described in the next section, B, Permitted Uses and Development Standards. Then it talks about
what the actual permitted uses are under a PUD application, none of which prohibit this
application from going through. I guess my response is, number one ( 1), 
ordinance prohibits this application in any way— before this meeting, I went through all the
meeting minutes. At every step of the process, no one ever said this isn' t a legal application
under the PUD' s ordinance. That' s a new and novel argument that I don' t think makes sense
the intent section of the ordinance doesn' t apply or carry any sort of
because,  number one ( 1), 
force of law, and it' s not prohibited under the permitted uses.  So,  I guess that' s my argument. 

I don' t think the

Councilmember Broden responded, Okay. 

Mr. Dvorak asked, Does that make sense? 

Councilmember Broden responded,  Sure, thank you. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner stated, Just for the sake of clarification, while it says that it may not
be intended, it doesn' t say it' s forbidden to use this. 

Mr. Dvorak responded, Right. It actually doesn' t say it may not be intended, it just says, " This is
the intent of the ordinance."  The rest of the ordinance actually spells out how it' s applied, and
there' s nothing in the actual meat of the ordinance that says this would be prohibited at all. 

Councilmember Davis stated,  You —and especially Dave Matthews, your client, has shared that
he liked the PUD because of the fact that it allows the Council to have more authority. Is that not

correct? 

Mr. Dvorak responded,  Correct. 

12

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Davis presented to Mr. Matthews and Mr. Dvorak an analogy in which the
Council and Mr. Matthews were two (2)  friends deciding how to distribute mushrooms and black
olives on a hypothetical pizza, and how to split the bill on the order of said pizza. 

Councilmember Davis argued that if the pizza cost forty dollars ($ 40)  and Mr. Matthews paid for
the entire pizza, he would be at Mr. Matthews'  mercy — conversely, if Councilmember Davis
paid for the whole pizza, Mr. Matthews would be at his mercy. He stated that he appreciated the
fact that Mr. Matthews had previously stated that he wanted the Council to have more control
over the fate of this project. Councilmember Davis stated that he felt that every suggestion given
by Council was shut out by Mr. Matthews, though. 

Mr. Matthews went on to explain, using the pizza analogy, that if—instead of paying twenty
dollars ($ 20),  or half of the cost of the pizza right away— Councilmember Davis opted to pay
fifty cents ($. 50)  every week for the next five (5)  years, that would be equivalent to how the tax
abatement would work for the actual PUD.  He further explained that if Councilmember Davis
paid twenty dollars ($20)  right away, that would be equivalent to the City abiding by the East
Bank Plan' s call for the City to build a garage on the property within the last eight (8)  years.  He
stated, If the garage was built by the City, as the plan called for, I can build a shorter building. 
So,  if the City doesn' t have the money to pay for the garage, we have no deal, unless we can
figure something out. What I figured out is that if we do a modified tax abatement and we go
taller, I can make enough money to cover the City' s portion and say, " Great, I' ll buy the whole
pizza today. You can pay for your share over the next ten years." 

Councilmember Davis responded that he felt that as the project could not proceed without
taxpayer money, that Council influence should in fact be equal to Mr. Matthews' s.  According to
the analogy, where both Councilmember Davis and Mr. Matthews have twenty dollars ($ 20) 
apiece, Mr. Matthews could not buy the pizza without Councilmember Davis' s contribution, no
matter how Councilmember Davis chose to pay his share.  Councilmember Davis stated that
despite this, it had been portrayed to him that Mr. Matthew' s influence was greater than his own. 
Councilmember Davis stated that he did not see the equal value of each party' s influence, in
practice. 

Mr. Dvorak stated that Mr. Matthews has been transparent about his financial situation. He
further stated that it was rare for developers to present a dozen ( 12)  different possibilities for a
project, to which Councilmember Davis responded that Council had received these different
configurations in the last week or two (2).  Councilmember Broden added, You had ninety (90) 
days.  Mr. Dvorak returned to the pizza analogy,  stating that people had been clamoring in the
East Bank area for pizza. Mr. Matthews showed up with the intent on buying the pizza for the
people. Council then showed up,  stating that they would pay Mr. Matthews back for the pizza
over five (5)  to ten ( 10)  years. As this arrangement does not allow for both to buy the pizza
upfront, Mr. Matthews would be the only one who could buy the pizza at the table, right then and
there. He stated that Council still wielded the most influence of all: should they say that they did
not want to do the project, the project would not go forward. 

Councilmember Davis responded that the only reason that Mr. Matthews has money upfront in
this scenario is because he knows he will be paid back. Without the tax abatements subject to
Council approval, the project could not happen. 

Mr. Dvorak agreed with Councilmember Davis. He further stated that population density was
critical to the success of the grocery store,  and that aside from those residing at the Pointe and
Mr. Matthews'  properties in the area, there were not many people living in the East Bank. Of
those people, Mr. Dvorak stated that, to the best of his knowledge, almost all have supported the
project. He stated, We humbly beseech your approval. 

Councilmember John Voorde deferred his question. 

Councilmember Tim Scott stated that he would defer his question as well, as he felt ready to
make a motion. 

Councilmember Karen White asked if the only way, from Mr. Matthews'  perspective as a
developer, that the project could go forward was if it were eleven ( 11)  stories tall. 

13

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Mr. Matthews responded that it could be shorter, but somebody would have to pay for it. 

Councilmember White asked if Mr. Matthews could speak about how the project could possibly
be in conflict with the South Bend Design Guidelines established in 2013. 

Jitin Kain approached the podium and explained that this was a revision to the Central Business
Development Area Plan which presented broad guidelines for policies affecting the Central
Business District, looking at the East Bank, West Bank, Monroe Industrial Park, and Medical
District as subsections of the Central Business District. He further explained that these guidelines
would say nothing about height or appearance,  but was concerned with the types of uses of
properties in these subsections of the Central Business District. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston asked Mr. Matthews what guarantee Council had that
Mr. Matthews would continue to pursue the acquisition of additional land that would allow the
height of the project to be brought down, if Council approves the project. 

Mr. Matthews responded that he did not know that there could be a guarantee. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston, addressing Mr. Dvorak, asked what the use of a City plan was
if developers could turn to PUD' s to break away from plan guidelines. She also asked how
vulnerable Council would be to legal action if they approved this PUD but denied another
developer' s PUD in the future. 

Mr. Dvorak responded that planning is important but that it is also important to plan for the plan
to fail. Where a PUD is appropriate, he stated,  is when it is a unique type of project that benefits
from its special type of planning. In his and Mr. Matthews'  view, a $ 50,000,000 Mixed -Use
project that brings in a grocery store and pharmacy, as well as two - hundred and forty (240) 
market -rate apartments is a special project. A PUD allows for the project to happen more quickly
and involves Council more in the smaller details of the project. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston responded,  So you' re saying that when Joe Developer comes
tomorrow— 

Mr. Dvorak interjected, stating that if someone tried to file a gas station as a PUD, they would
obviously not be eligible. 

Councilmember Broden asked, Based on what criteria, though? She stated that the project
ignored the Comprehensive Plan, to which Mr. Dvorak responded that it ignored only part of the
plan.  Councilmember Broden stated that it was a critical aspect of the plan, and argued that the
project bucked against the scale, design,  and aesthetic set for the neighborhood in 2004 and
reasserted in 2008 with the East Bank Plan. She then asked how Council could turn away other
petitioners going against the plan if the PUD in question, which was against the plan, was

approved. 

Mr. Dvorak responded that it was under the authority vested in the Council to make zoning
decisions that they could decide whether to approve or disapprove of a petition. City plan calls
for high density, mixed -use, walkability, the connection ofpublic resources ( such as the City' s
trails), as well as the bringing in of useful retail in a way that makes the City more urban. He
argued that that was what the project intended to do. He stated that the project takes a vacant lot
and brings in high quality urban development. He stated that, given this, he felt that it was an
easy call to make. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic, addressing Mr. Matthews,  stated, Dave, in conversations with
some Councilmembers, I think there' s a sense that if this does not pass tonight, then we' ll just
keep on working on it and we' ll get it figured out. Is there a legitimate chance in your mind that
if we don' t pass this tonight, that we are not going to see a grocery store downtown and we' re
not going to see a pharmacy downtown? 

Mr. Matthews responded,  I think you' ll see one, but it might be a long time before you do. 

Councilmember Ferlic asked whether or not there was a good chance that this project on this
parcel would not happen in any shape or form if Council does not approve the project. 

14

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Mr. Matthews responded that he and his team care about the City, that they want to get a grocery
store and pharmacy downtown, but that they had been working on the project for half a year. He
asked, Do we want to do it, or not? If we don' t want to do it, okay, we' ll go build other stuff in
the neighborhood. The building is leased up; we' ll keep renting it. He stated, though, that he and
Council had an opportunity, right then, to move forward with the project. 

Councilmember Davis asked Mr. Matthews if the project, when first proposed,  was at seven ( 7) 
stories in height, to which Mr. Matthews responded yes. Mr. Matthews explained that when
South Bend was applying for the Regional Cities grant, he submitted a letter that included two
2)  paragraphs explaining the general idea of the project. When the region was awarded the
Regional Cities grant, he had to update the math —at which point Rob Bartels contributed a letter
of support. Mr. Matthews stated that that was when the project grew much larger. 

Councilmember Davis then asked Mr. Matthews why in 2013 he was opposed to a similarly
against -plan development, but now had done a one - hundred and eighty degree ( 180 °) turn. 

Mr. Matthews responded,  Frank Perri and Tom Panzica proposed on the old Wharf site —south
of Colfax, next to the river; that triangular sandlot that' s been vacant for sixteen ( 16)  years. They
went to the ABZA —not the City Council —and asked for a height variance to go taller. They
increased the height limit from sixty (60)  feet to almost one - hundred ( 100).  That' s not the zoning
authority: the City Council is.  So,  we went to Mishawaka, Osceola, some South Bend reps,  and
some County reps and said, " Hey, in downtown South Bend, is it okay to build a suburban -like
apartment building with a parking lot around it in the middle of downtown ?" It was a poor urban
design, and it was the wrong people to ask. The City Council should decide if it' s changing. 

Councilmember Davis asked if Mr. Perri and Mr. Panzica had brought the project to the City
Council, would Mr. Matthews have relented his protest. Mr. Matthews responded that if the
project had been brought to the Council, and had been more pedestrian friendly instead of "a
couple of towers in a sea of parking,"  he would not have objected to it. He stated that everything
about the project motivated him to speak against it. 

Councilmember Davis stated that in reading Mr. Matthews'  testimonial from that time, he did
not see any mention of protest against those particular details of the project. Councilmember
Davis noted an emphasis on ideas of density and other factors similar to those present in Mr. 
Matthews'  own project. Mr. Matthews stated that he could not recall what precisely he had said
on record, but that after Mr. Perri had gotten his project approved by the ABZA, Mr. Matthews
brought two (2)  projects to the ABZA that were subsequently denied by the ABZA. 

Councilmember Voorde stated that though he appreciated the alternatives presented by Mr. 
Matthews, he did not think that it was productive to negotiate those alternatives at a Council
meeting. He stated,  I want to focus on the garage and to make sure that I understand the
alternatives. The number of living units in each one of these proposals varies.  Obviously, if
you' re talking about one - hundred and twenty -seven ( 127)  feet, you' re talking about one - hundred
and forty -four ( 144)  or one - hundred and sixty -eight ( 168)  units, right? The cost to the City to
help you make this financially feasible is either a $4,700, 000 or $4, 100, 000 contribution to help
you build the garage? 

Mr. Matthews responded that a better way of looking at it is that the City approved the East Bank
Plan and said that they would pay for the garage.  He stated, It' s been eight ( 8)  years. A recession
hit, the hospital left town, a high school moved in —the neighborhood' s changed. He stated that
the City never built that garage and did not intend to build it; that it knows that a garage is
necessary in order to do any development on the block. The City could then chip in $4,700, 000
toward the $ 12, 600, 000 they should have spent to build the garage. 

Councilmember Voorde responded,  In your alternatives —your options— is the garage size

static? 

Mr. Matthews responded that if they were building on grass, this would be much easier. The
current parking spaces are booked with the Commerce Center. He stated, If we build a garage, 
it' s not just building a garage to satisfy the demand of the apartments or the grocery store —it' s
building a garage to satisfy the demand of the office workers that are getting displaced when the
grocery store goes in and their ground -floor hundred ( 100)  spots of customer parking comes in. 

15

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

He stated that the proposed garage was sized for the daily traffic needed for the grocery store, 
pharmacy, office workers, and a small amount for daytime apartment parkers. At night, though, 
he stated that the garage was probably going to be half -empty because the grocery store, 
pharmacy,  and office would be closed. This abundance of volume could accommodate increased
density in the area, such as if the Pointe wanted to expand. 

Councilmember Voorde asked, If Fire Arts became available— 

Mr. Matthews interjected, I' m on the board, I talk to them. 

Councilmember Voorde continued, asking ifthat development became available if they would be
strictly apartment units, like what is to be built on Sycamore,  or if they would be a commercial - 

residential mix. 

Mr. Matthews responded, The ground floor, if they go commercial, they are going to put a
demand on the parking of the grocery store and on the streets. If it' s low- impact commercial
during the day, then we can have commercial on the ground floor. There is not going to be
enough capacity in that garage, though, to do an office building or commercial uses on multiple
floors. It' s going to have to be residential — unless we build another garage,  but I don' t think it' s
necessary. 

Councilmember Voorde asked if the garage,  in all the alternative configurations of the project, 
would be sized to accommodate more than a downsized building, to which Mr. Matthews
responded that as long as the building is mostly residential, the garage would be accommodating. 

Councilmember Scott, addressing Community Investment, stated that in 2008 there was an
expected real estate tax increase of $2, 700, 000. He asked how much of this plan has been
realized, in terms of tax generation. 

Brian Pawlowski, Interim Executive Director, Community Investment, with offices on the 14' 
Floor of the County -City Building, stated that the short version of the answer was that the City
was not there yet. 

Councilmember Broden, addressing Mr. Pawlowski and Mr. Mueller, asked why, after a four (4) 
month -long process,  Council received four (4)  additional project options —as well as the
Mayor' s letter listing his preferred compromise —only in the last twenty -four (24)  hours. 

Mr. Mueller responded that negotiations had been going on for several months, and that the
issues presented that night were not altogether new. He stated, I credit a lot of the
Councilmembers for their efforts to get these kinds of options there. We' ve been trying to push
some sort of compromise for many weeks.  Quite frankly, I think there was a perception that you
could peel off a fifth vote and not necessarily follow what the Administration was negotiating. I
think when there became a clear message from the Council that you wanted to see a compromise
and we were trying to negotiate that compromise, this is when you saw a movement of- 

Councilmember Broden interjected, stating, So really, your focus started two (2)  weeks ago
when we got that pressure.  She pointed out that none of the options conform to the East Bank
Plan.  She asked,  as a result, where the compromise was. 

Mr. Mueller responded that he felt that it was a compromise between business development and
planning. He stated that, regarding Councilmember Scott' s question about the amount of
development seen since the 2008 plan, there had not been as much development as projected at
all. He stated that developers present would probably agree with the notion that height makes
these sorts of projects viable. He stated, So,  we have to develop what' s possible with what we
would like to see. 

Mr. Pawlowski added that the exercise with the consultant was productive. He further stated that
Community Investment started to consider different options for the project after the Area Plan
Commission, when issues started to come in to the Council, the Mayor' s office, and Community
Investment' s office —which occurred more than two ( 2)  weeks prior to this meeting. He
explained that TIF resources are finite. He stated, When we' re looking at what we' re able to get
out the door toward projects —be it in the East Bank or different portions of the City —we do
have competing needs for those things. So, to the extent that the East Bank is alive and vibrant, 

16

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

because of the fact that we' re not hitting those investment goals that have been outlined in the
2008 plan, it' s not a very hefty TIF in terms of the overall funding that it has.  So,  we have to be
conscious of the resources that exist there and when and how to expend those,  in terms of the
different projects that come in. It' s not just laser -focus on one ( 1)  project. 

Councilmember Broden, addressing also Angela Smith, asked what the process was for moving
forward with possibly revising the Comprehensive Plan. 

Mr. Mueller responded,  I' d be remiss if we didn' t put in a plug for the Red Tape Commission, 
where we go over the Code and existing plans, and take a look at what makes sense today and
what doesn' t. 

Mr. Pawlowski stated that Councilmember Davis' s recommendation of reviewing plans for a
given year is a natural place to start with the Comprehensive Plan revision process.  He explained
that any ordinance discussion of this type would always come back to the Council. 

Councilmember Broden asked what effect approving the PUD would have on other

neighborhood plans. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded that the project in question would not strictly make sense in the East
Bank Village, but it might make sense in the wider context of the Central Business District. He
stated that he did not think it would have an adverse effect on other neighborhoods. 

Councilmember Broden asked the question again, this time specifically to Angela Smith and
Larry Magliozzi. 

Angela Smith, Area Plan Commission, with offices on the 1 Vh Floor of the County -City
Building, stated that there was a concern that if a decision was made that night that goes against
the Comprehensive Plan or encourages a PUD in violation of the intent of the PUD district, then
other developers may be able to follow the same path, and it would make it more difficult for the
City Council to address those items in a way that was consistent with plan and Council
precedent. 

Councilmember Broden asked if there was some concern or if this was a case of direct liability in
a Court of Law. 

Ms. Smith responded that she was not an attorney. She stated that even if the intent criteria of the
PUD were not met, Council would still have to look at whether or not the PUD is consistent with

the Comprehensive Plan. 

Councilmember Davis asked if things like less -than- expected tax generation in the East Bank
Village factors into the Area Plan Commission' s decision to recommend or not recommend a

proj ect. 

Ms. Smith responded, When we' re looking at whether or not a proposal is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan, we' re not looking at whether or not the financial goals for a project have
been met to that plan. The overall goals of the plan stay in effect up until another plan replaces it
with an amendment. 

Councilmember Davis asked, If a plan is only meeting one twenty -fifth (1/ 25)  of its goals and
another plan is meeting ninety -six percent ( 96 %) of its goals, wouldn' t it be wise for
Councilmembers whose plan is hitting ninety -six percent ( 96 %)  of its goals to make sure that
they are more aggressive with that plan, and the one that is hitting one twenty -fifth (1/ 25)  of its
goals you don' t really have to aggressively push for? 

Ms. Smith responded, It' s hard, in this instance, when you' re talking about the financial aspect of
it, because there are a lot of goals other than the financial and investment ones.  The
Comprehensive Plan was decided to come up with policies that are consistent with the
neighborhood. The financial aspects often come into projects that would enforce those policies. 
Those projects are often laid out and may or may not ever come to fruition. The planning aspect
is looking at the land -use matters,  not the financial stuff behind the land -use matters. If it was up
to the Council to evaluate these plans,  looking at those might be indicators that maybe a plan is
out of date, or it was not a good policy to start with. Those would be indicators to maybe go back

17

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

and revisit that plan through the process, but until that plan is actually replaced, these are still
those policy and guideline and land -use policies and zoning issues that we have to look at when
we have to evaluate them for that area plan. The underlying Comprehensive Plan itself, without
going back through the process,  is still the underlying plan until it' s replaced. 

Councilmember Davis asked, No matter how much it has met financial obligations or not? 

Ms. Smith reiterated that the plan is what APC considers, not financial goals. 

Councilmember Davis asked what APC' s initial counsel to Mr. Matthews was, and what the
rationale for that counsel was. 

Ms. Smith responded that APC, in May or June,  did not believe that the PUD was the appropriate
avenue for this project. They also felt that the project was very complex and so they
recommended that Mr. Matthews go to the Project Advisory team, which allows the project to be
reviewed by several departments, including Engineering, or the Department of Community
Investment. APC recommended to Mr. Matthews to remain zoned in Central Business District
and to seek a variance. Another recommendation was to rezone to Mixed -Use and seek
variances. Once the PUD had been reviewed, APC' s recommendation came out. She stated, We
gave him those options, and he chose to follow the PUD option. She also stated that APC
recommended that Mr. Matthews have a discussion with the Department of Community
Investment to look at reevaluating the East Bank Plan if he thought it was out -of -date. 

Councilmember Davis asked why that last bit of counsel was given to Mr. Matthews. 

Ms. Smith responded that Mr. Matthews had expressed that enough had changed in the
neighborhood that the plan had become out -of -date.  She stated that if anyone thinks the plan is
so out -of -line, the best way to determine if it is or not is to revisit the plan. 

Councilmember Davis asked how long the plan amendment process would take. 

Ms. Smith explained that though the actual process itself is a forty -five (45)  day process, the
development of the plan by the Department of Community Investment is very lengthy. 

Councilmember Davis asked Mark Robinson to share with the Council updates on where AEP
Indiana Michigan Power was regarding a promissory letter on the subject of Mr. Matthews
potentially acquiring the property. 

Mark Robinson, Indiana Michigan Power, 2929 Lathrop Street,  South Bend, IN 46628 stated that
two substations were being mandated: the old Drewry Station and the Colfax Station. He stated
that the stations are old, and that they were going to rebuild the stations as they connected them. 
He explained that the Colfax station was not a great place for a substation. He and Mr. Matthews
had had conversations about moving that station to another property that Mr. Matthews owns. He
stated, That is still very much a line of conversation. The mandate would be put in place in mid - 
to -late 2019. Mr. Robinson stated that the promissory letter referenced by Councilmember Davis
was a letter of intent from AEP and it stated that they were still very much interested in moving
the substation. He stated,  We are very much interested in having the conversation about the land - 
swap, because although it doesn' t really impose a lot of potential benefit to us as a company, if
we are going to do it, we might as well do it in the best interest ofthe community at large. We
have been speaking with the City quite a bit. Mr. Robinson stated that his team had been in
contact with Jitin Kain, the Department of Community Investment, as well as their Organization, 
Transmission, and Planning group. He stated,  The timing is the key, and unfortunately we' re not
a year earlier on the timing. He explained that they would have to put everything in place in
2019 —and 2019 is the latest they could get the work done —but that it may be possible to
piecemeal the project and move certain pieces ahead of others. 

Councilmember Davis asked,  So that' s what' s going to be in your letter of intent? 

Mr. Robinson responded that they had not even had a feasibility study done on the land. He
stated, There are several different options for the transmission line, including working with Notre
Dame. There are a lot of moving parts to that project. It is not a simple project. The letter would
be an intent letter —it would not be any type of a guarantee that could be put on the project, 

18

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Davis asked,  When you do intent letters, what has been your success rate? 

Mr. Robinson responded,  So,  the project will happen. It' s a mandate by PJ, which is a regional
transmission organization and manages the transmission grid and the wholesale market of
electricity. It is their mandate, for reliability purposes, that we do this project. When you look at
the commitment that we made to this City, via Smart Streets— of course,  in conjunction with
Smart Streets, but with the network upgrades that we had to do,  because of the incidents that we
had. We are completing that this weekend. When we say we are going to do something, we are
going to do it. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked whether 2018 or 2019 was the soonest the project could
be completed, and afterward asked if there was anything the City of South Bend could do to help
that process along. 

Mr. Robinson responded, A lot of that discussion is based on the funding, because that is the
capital expenditure for our company, and those projectswe vibe with ten ( 10)  other states for
the funding ofthese projects. He explained that there are so many variables involved in these
projects. If it went really well, he determined that it would be completed before 2019. 

Councilmember Williams- Preston asked, Is there anything that a municipality could do to help
grease the wheels? 

Mr. Robinson responded, Just knowing where existing utilities arethat type of thing. We are
supposed to get plans.  He stated that it is helpful to not have setbacks that could have been
avoided through discussion ahead of time. The Department of Public Works offered to do
everything it could to make sure the process goes forward smoothly. 

Councilmember Wiliams- Preston asked if Mr. Robinson had ever come in before his deadline on
these projects, to which he responded that he had. 

Mr. Robinson stated, They have given us plenty of time. I would say that you' ll be hearing more
and more about our transmission projects. He stated that if they reroute the underground portion
of the Colfax Station line and they can reconnect that, as the other station is being built, the
Colfax Station might be able to be abandoned early, though he admitted to not being sure,  as he
was not an engineer. He stated,  But if we could, and it makes sense,  we will. 

Councilmember Broden asked how much time Mr. Robinson had spent with staff regarding the
project' s feasibility. 

Mr. Robinson responded,  We have had two (2)  meetings lately. One ( 1), 
and a half, maybe two (2)  years ago.  So this has been a project that we' ve seen coming for a
while. It is probably going to move a whole lot faster now. I' d say, all man hours on our side in
conversation with the City— probably about forty (40)  hours, fifty (50)  hours. 

I believe, was a year

Councilmember Broden stated that one of the recommendations from the Torti Gallas group was
to spread out the development and phase it in over time. She stated,  To me,  it looks like maybe
there' s a one ( 1)  year difference there between your deadline and Mr. Matthews'.  She asked Mr. 
Matthews if his project' s deadline was the year 2020.  Mr. Matthews confirmed that 2020 was
indeed the deadline year. 

Mr. Matthews,  in reference to Mr. Robinson, added,  Another question to ask would be what' s the
likelihood that this site we' re looking at is not feasible, and you just stay at Colfax? That' s a
possibility. 

Mr. Robinson stated,  I will tell you all the plans that I' ve seen involve just your location, as a
swap.  I have not seen any for the existing space. 

Councilmember Davis asked Mr. Mueller to clarify a section of Mayor Buttigieg' s letter that
states, " Given to the tight timeline associated with the $4. 9 million Regional Cities grant from
the state, I respectfully request that the council support the administration' s negotiating team and
our effort to arrive at a compromise."  He stated,  When I hear " our effort to arrive at a
compromise,"  that means that you haven' t gotten there. It seems to me,  from this paragraph, that
this is even looking beyond tonight. Where are you on that? 

19

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Mr. Mueller explained that the target date for Regional Cities financing is in June 2017. When
the project does not progress, the risk of money going anywhere else increases as time goes on. 
That is one time constraint. The Council still needs to approve the tax abatement necessary for
the project' s funding. The Administration wants to keep making progress and wants to keep
trying to work with the developer to get to a good solution for the neighborhood. 
Councilmember Davis stated, Your thoughts of the tax abatement process is where your
negotiation team is prepared to focus on any sound resolution, tonight. 

Mr. Mueller responded, I think getting clarity from Council on this matter would be helpful. If
we don' t have a solution tonight, the risks do go up over time. 

Councilmember Davis stated that the central idea of that paragraph in the Mayor' s letter was that
Council would need to compromise. He stated that the compromise would need to happen for not
only the two (2)  issues shared upfront, but also the tax abatement. 

Brian Pawlowski stated, In terms of the tax abatement, if you look at that paper of options and
you look at,  say,  Option D, you can see the different assumptions that are built in there on the tax
abatements.  For example, if you look at Option D, it says 100 % x 10 —that would be one- 
hundred percent ( 100 %) abated over a decade.  I think, as the letter lays out, we have pushed our
compromise which is a ten ( 10)  year abatement at ninety -five percent ( 95 %)  per year for the
entirety of that ten ( 10)  years, and then an addition for increased public and green space along
the Race waterway. We would be prepared to contribute an additional $ 1, 500, 000. We have been
driving it after time —the numbers just simply don' t end up working out. The garage obviously
plays a huge role in that discussion. As the letter also makes clear, if you look at the assumptions
of the other option, B —of 100%  x 5 and 95%  x 5—  that' s the assumption that we' re banking in
to meet financial obligations, both for Regional Cities and the overall project. 

Councilmember Broden asked if these options would be going through as a PUD or if the aim
was to change,  as soon as possible, the Comprehensive Plan, therefore having these options go
through as a rezoning for the Central Business District with variances.  She asked, What do you
recommend with regard to the tool that we use,  going forward with this? 

Mr. Mueller responded that, in terms oftiming, the best option would be the PUD. He stated, We
would prefer to get some clarity from Council on their height limit. The sooner the better.  So, 
tonight, we have a PUD before us.  We could start a process next year, should you guys prefer
that process.  But, as time goes on, we risk missing the deadline. 

Councilmember Broden asked,  So,  you' re asking —for reasons of simplicity and timing —that it
go through a PUD and that we stipulate the height based on one ( 1)  of these options that you' ve

provided us? 

Mr. Mueller responded that the Mayor had recommended in his letter his preferred option, as
well as the eleven ( 11)  story option. 

Councilmember Broden stated that there are district standards entailed in the PUD that the
petitioner has agreed to, in the past, or has represented in his public statements.  She asked, Are
we prepared to go over that, tonight, and to address those and incorporate that into this PUD? 
Second, is the petitioner willing to abide by the design standards of the Central Business District, 
as outlined by the Redevelopment Commission? 

Mr. Pawlowski stated, Councilmember Davis, in your letter that you' d asked for, outlining some
of the changes that had been made as a result of the developer' s conversations with DCI as well
as the APC. We had sent that outline. Some of those changes into some of the categories that
you' re discussing. I think the short version is yes. 

Councilmember Broden responded, Yeah, because I think they' re about district standards and
then it seems as if there was some tradeoff for height standards,  or public spaces,  public
amenities, those types of things. 

Mr. Pawlowski asked, Are you referring to DCI' s past decisions? The ninety -six (96)  foot height
limit on a previous project —I would tell you that that was an isolated project that was looked at
in that circumstance. Public space,  green space,  and some other tradeoffs design -wise were

20

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

considered in relationship to the height, and that' s why I made the decision. I think, otherwise
though, the rest of those different development standards that exist within the CBD per our plans, 
as Jitin outlined, deal more with the use aspects rather than some of the design aspects.  Some of
the design aspects that were concerning, the developer worked with them on that. That was
outlined in the letter that we had sent a while back. 

Councilmember Broden stated,  So that' s updated and that would be incorporated in— 

Mr. Pawlowski interjected, stating, Yeah, I think anything that we submitted, automatically
being part of the record, actually is part of the overall public file on it, at this point. All that is
public record. 

Chairperson Ferlic attempted to close the portion of the discussion of Bill No. 41 - 16 devoted to
questions, but Councilmember Broden protested, stating that to approve these PUD' s,  Council
needed to go through all the relevant different uses and development standards. 

Mr. Matthews responded,  The design standards we went through with staff, and we went through
before the City Council Meeting and the Informal Meeting. I' m under the impression that there
weren' t any objections to the staff' s recommendations, which we then modified our PUD
application to meet, but if you have objections to any of those, I' m happy to talk about them, I
guess.  I felt like we' ve moved beyond all those questions,  and the only thing outstanding was
height and who is paying for the garage. 

Ms. Smith stated, I believe you' re talking about the Downtown Design Review Area? Ms. Smith
then explained what that entailed to Mr. Matthews. She stated, I think she is asking you if you
would be okay with following the downtown design guidelines in this project. Mr. Matthew
expressed that his internal design standards were way above the downtown design standards. 

Ms. Smith stated, Just to clarify, as part of the Downtown Design Review Area, if he were to do
anything outside of that, he would go in front of the Design Review Committee who would grant
any waivers to that. One of the things with the PUD is that our department is tasked with keeping
track of any commitments or anything made as part of this. We have a chart where we have been
trying to follow any development standards and anything that the Council would recommend, 
which we would incorporate also.  For instance, we have incorporated in here that so far as what
he' s represented,  it says the parapet height will be one - sixty -two ( 162)  feet, the overall height
would be one - seventy -five ( 175).  I would actually encourage the Council, if they pursue the
PUD, to not hold him to the square - footages outlined in the presentations that he' s made.  In past
projects, we probably would have had to hold him to that, but because this is a Central Business
District kind of project, and there could be some flexibility as the project develops,  we don' t
want to get into a position where we would have to say, " You only represented that there would
be two - hundred (200)  square feet of residential —you can' t do two -ten ( 210)."  Any references to
square - footages of the per -use, we would recommend that you would not incorporate those items
from the record. Some of the larger issues were: the main floor of the building shall contain at
least three ( 3)  entry points, one of which would be a residential entry; the area east of the
existing Commerce Center would be reserved as open space accessible to the general public; the
ground floor shall be a nonresidential use.  I don' t know that there' s any of those in there that Mr. 
Matthews should have any objection to. 

Mr. Matthews asked Ms.  Smith if she had the parapet height in her record as one - hundred and
sixty -three ( 163)  feet or one - hundred and sixty -two ( 162)  feet. Ms. Smith responded that she had
one - hundred and sixty -two ( 162)  in her record and corrected it to state that the parapet height
was set at one - hundred and sixty -three ( 163)  feet. 

Councilmember Davis asked Ms. Smith if she had seen the proposals sent to Council over the
weekend by Mr. Matthews, to which she responded that she had.  Councilmember Davis asked
what Ms. Smith' s thoughts on Mr. Matthews'  proposals and the Mayor' s letter were. 

Ms. Smith responded,  Our recommendation, as the Area Plan Commission staff to the Area Plan
Commission when we' re looking at land -use issues —we still look at whether or not it' s
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The only option that gets close to the Comprehensive
Plan would be Option E. 

21

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Davis asked Ms. Smith to clarify Option E for the public. 

Ms. Smith responded, Option E is the one that shows the maximum height at sixty -seven (67) 
feet at the parapet. The ordinance actually calls for sixty (60).  The Comprehensive Plan talks
about a low -to -mid rise —for which the general height variance is seventy -five (75).  So,  Option E
would be consistent with the low -to -mid rise criteria. It would still exceed what is allowed per
the ordinance, but it would be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. All the other options
would not be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 

Councilmember Broden, referring to Option E, asked, And that would require $ 12, 600, 000
upfront to actually abide by the East Bank Village Plan and the Comprehensive Plan? 

Mr. Matthews responded, The City would just have to build the garage on the plan that the plan
calls for the City to build. 

Councilmember Davis asked if there was any way that the City could pay for the garage,  given
that the plan calls for the City to build one there. 

Mr. Mueller responded, You raise a great point, and this is an issue with plans across the board. 
We come with a great plan, but we don' t always figure out the funding sources behind the plan. 
There' s a Southeast Plan that has a lot of great stuff in it —we can' t identify all the funding for
that. There' s other plans that we can' t identify the funds for. If you' re saying would we want to
put $12, 600, 000 when we know that we have a fiscal curve coming up in 2020.  We may have a
unintelligible]  in our Motor Vehicle Highway Fund. I would not say this would be among the
highest priorities, if we found somewhere, magically, $ 12, 600, 000. 

Councilmember Davis asked if the City had made any considerations whatsoever regarding the
funding of construction of the promised garage. 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, This is kind of what I was inartfully trying to get at earlier, which is: 
as the ' 08 plan set out the investment targets,  if you assume those investment targets are hidden
away —not general or civil city funding, but TIF funding is absorbed into that district and then
can be theoretically put back into a garage or other business ventures, or any other thing that you
might want. We have not seen that. So,  the TIF is not as robust as I think we would have hoped
that it would have been, because those are really your funding sources. The fiscal cliff that many
of us are anticipating in 2020, or shortly thereafter, is going to make things like this really cost - 
prohibitive in any other way than bonding. I think John Murphy would smack me in the back of
the head if I said we had any type of funding in the General Fund to do that. In the future, TIF is
really the mechanism to do it. Projects like this will enable the TIF over time and the General
Fund after that to be a little more well - funded, in terms of tax dollars, whether they be TIF or
General Fund. As that ' 08 was done,  let' s not forget that that was right at the time of a pretty
rough patch, nationally as well as locally. 

Councilmember Davis responded,  I agree with the ' 08 plan being done.  At the same time, those
of us in this Council that were here during that plan, we raised everything in the City. We
planned for that plan. Our city has gotten all the financial rewards, and we' ve been rolling on, 
and we' re not like other cities in the State because we took measures and planned to deal with
that storm. He stated that after having raised taxes, the City should have generated enough
money that, with a bit of applied creativity, could be put toward this garage. He asked, Why
can' t we keep our promise to this plan so that he does not have to go and build something way to
the scraper, get everybody in the community upset except those who believe in everything he
does.  We keep our plan and he keeps his plan. We get the store, we get everything else. 
Mr. Pawlowski responded, It' s unfortunate, but we just haven' t seen the financial growth and the
development there that we wanted to see to enable this to happen at this point. 

Councilmember Broden asked, And the resources with regard to the Wharf project —what is
going in there? Is that okay to ask and to actually connect those dots for that garage, please? 
Mr. Pawlowski responded,  I would prefer not to get too into it. We don' t have any signed
development agreements at this point. 

22

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Broden asked,  Is the petitioner in the room? Or would the developer in the room
like to address that? 

Frank Perri approached the podium to answer Councilmember Broden' s question, but
Councilmember Tim Scott declared a point of order.  Councilmember Scott asked for someone to
explain to him how this line of questioning relates to the PUD. He stated, I think we' ve gotten
way into the woods on all types of speculation on garages. Where does this fit? Directly relate it
to the PUD, 41 - 16,  that we have before us. 

Councilmember Broden stated that the developer said that assistance with the garage would help
compress the height of the project. She stated that Councilmember Davis was trying to look for
resources for garages in the East Bank District. 

Councilmember Scott responded that the person of expertise would be someone who works in
City finances. 

Chairperson Ferlic agreed and stated,  If the question is, " What are the funds available ?" the
question should be directed toward Brian Pawlowski. 

Councilmember Davis agreed but felt that Frank Perri might offer insight into the matter, and
that Council needed all the insight it could get. He asked Mr. Perri to come up and share his
thoughts on the matter. Certain members of the Council audibly questioned the relevance of the
question. Chairperson Ferlic asked Interim Council Attorney Aladean De Rose if the asking of
the question was to be decided by vote or by the Chair, to which she replied that this was a
decision to be made by the Chair. Councilmember Davis asked how Council could override the
Chair' s decision, adding that he was sure that it could be overridden. Councilmember Dr. Varner
stated that a two - thirds (2/ 3)  vote was necessary.  Chairperson Ferlic stated that the question was
relevant, but asked that it were directed only to Mr. Pawlowski. 

Mr. Pawlowski stated,  The simple version is:  if you are asking if resources out the door for one
project affect the other, the answer is yes.  What we are prepared and willing to do on one project
is completely dependent on its merits alone, and we are looking at this project in that respect. 
Past that, I think it would be bad precedent, potentially, to talk about other deals that are
currently in active negotiation. There are finite resources in that TIF, to be sure —both now and
in the foreseeable future, for the next five (5)  years out. Decisions will have to be made. My
personal view at this point is that we can see a lot of growth and development there without
hindering any of the projects —and future ones to come,  as well. 

Councilmember Dr. Varner stated,  There is a shortage of funds,  and in fact this project won' t
have any money in the TIF funds for about ten ( 10)  years because of the aggressive tax
abatement. Would it be fair to say that this seems to be the only plan that gets both these projects
done, rather than having to take money from one project and put it in another? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, Any scenario where we don' t have to contribute cash out the door, 
and we can take care of a developer' s needs or a regional match, in this case,  with a phase -in in
taxes— that' s certainly a preference we would have. The option that you all have seen of 100%  x
5 and 95%  x 5— in that situation, you are getting tax dollars in the door, after the initial five (5) 
years.  After the decade is up, the TIF still has life until thirty -three ( 3 3)  or thirty -five (35),  where
the full amount could be upwards of $800, 000,  a portion of which flows into the TIF a bunch. 

Councilmember Davis asked, So,  you' re telling me that there' s no other option to fund this
outside of TIF in that area? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, As someone who is not the General Fund expert, I think the answer to
that is no. 

Councilmember Davis asked, So,  therefore the City cannot keep its commitment to take care of
that? 

Mr. Pawlowski responded, I think the City' s commitment was based on assumptions that
unfortunately just did not come to pass.  Had those investment targets all been met, we would not
need this conversation. This is the type of development that we want to see drive things over
there. This developer; other developers who are in the room. Their projects are going to be the

23

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

ones that revitalize this TIF and really put dollars in the pocket to do even more in the future that
hopefully comes before you. 

Councilmember Ferlic announced that the Council portion for questions was closed. At this
point, each Councilmember in a line would offer one ( 1)  final comment. No Councilmember
would be revisited. Only after each Councilmember had given their comment would the Council
entertain any motions. 

Councilmember Scott asked everyone to respect each person who has the floor. 

Councilmember Regina Williams- Preston stated that with projects brought to the Council there
are so many loose ends. This begs for the due diligence of Council and the search for options that
could satisfy a given project and policy. These issues of process mean that if the Council says no
to a developer that they may not seem friendly to development in general.  She stated that it felt
like it was up to Council to make sure that things were done in line with the law. She stated that
petitioners should be held accountable for making sure that they are doing what they need to do, 
so that these questions don' t end up in Council' s lap. Councilmember Williams- Preston stated
that she had issues with this moving forward as a PUD and was hoping for a different way to
proceed. She stated that the Council Attorney had warned that this would put Council in danger
of liability; that the decision could be viewed as arbitrary and capricious. She stated that there
were really great ideas brought forth at the last minute, and that that was not the way to make big
decisions.  She found the proposal hard to support as is. 

Councilmember Randy Kelly stated that this was supposed to be in Council' s lap, that it was
time to make a decision. He did not feel that information was presented to the Council at the
eleventh ( 1 Ith) hour. He stated that consultants were brought in to present options, but none of
them were viable because the City does not have $ 12, 600,000 in TIF to build the garage.  Many
have said that the project would be better on the other side of the river — Councilmember Kelly
stated that that was not a good enough reason to turn down a $ 50, 000,000 project. He stated that
Mr. Matthews did a good job of making the project feasible. He stated that the 2008 East Bank
Plan opened with the recognition of the fact that there had been no development in the area up to
that point, and that was the reason for the plan in the first place.  He stated that that means that
there have been nearly two (2)  decades of little development in the East Bank. Here is a chance, 
he stated, to let in a $ 50, 000, 000 development. There needs to be a first twelve ( 12)  story
building. He thought that a bridge between the east and the west of the river would be good. 
Councilmember Jo Broden stated that the unique flavor of the East Bank will fall with this
project because of the choice to go up rather than out; that it would negate the community- 
building effort of the creation of the East Bank Plan. She argued that a distinction between the
east of the river and the west of the river was a good thing. She stated that the project' s height
was egregious and that it would be a game- changer for the rest of the district. She argued that
though it provides for long- desired needs, there should not be this level of separation between the
vision that has been expressed through the East Bank Plan and the proposed project' s features. 
She felt that it was problematic that she received a message from Mr. Matthews on the evening
of Sunday, December 11,  2016 and received another on the Council table, yet the public was not
privy to these messages in advance. She stated that there has been no compromise on height until
twelve ( 12)  hours prior to the current Council meeting.  She stated, We can hit density or tax
dollar targets, but how do we get there —up or out? She argued that the nature of the
neighborhood suggested that building out was the solution. If the future of the neighborhood is to
be redirected, she stated,  it should be in a collective way instead of by way of development plans. 
She stated, We can do better. The plan should still be around after this decision, she concluded. 

Councilmember Dr. David Varner stated that the Council once passed on University Park Mall
because it did not seem to fit the plan, and that did not work out for the City. The Hall of Fame
was built, and yet did not really work out for the City, either. He stated that the City has been
crying for people to bring in private money and development so that the City does not have to
use TIF or raise taxes so that the City does not spend on plans. He asked, What do you do with a
plan that is ten ( 10)  years old with one ( 1)  building to show for it in that district? He stated that a
plan can be well- intentioned and unviable at the same time. He argued that some discretion
should be left to the developers to determine ifthey can make a project profitable. He stated, I

24

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

don' t know how you can fit a grocery store and pharmacy into three ( 3)  separate buildings. He
pointed out that the request for amenities dictates a fairly large footprint. He argued that large
buildings are the kind of thing that put towns on the map. He contrasted reaction to the height of
the proposed project to lack of reaction to the twelve ( 12)  story tall Karl King Tower on Lincoln
Way East, stating that residents drive by it every day and do not give it a second thought. He
concluded that the PUD was a good opportunity for the City: little upfront cash from the City
would give the City money for other development. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic stated that PUD' s must be evaluated according to rational criteria. 
He argued that the project fit within the character of the neighborhood,  that it was a desired use, 
that density would increase commercial value— therefore,  a grocery store and pharmacy would
increase property values for residential properties. He stated that ninety -five percent (95 %)  of the
proposed project fits the plan, and that only the height does not fit. He stated that the City has
powerful momentum —that the City has found a way to say yes and that its reputation has
improved as a result. He contrasted this with a failure to acquire University Park Mall, WSBT, 
and May Oberfell Lorber —all caused by the desire to fit the projects too perfectly to plans.  He
stated that there were lost opportunities and lost jobs, and that lives were negatively impacted by
these failures. The majority of people, he stated,  support the project. He listed among those
people the Neighborhood Association, the River Race Flats Homeowners Association, and the
East Bank Homeowners Association. He added that a reasonable attorney can say that this is an
appropriate project, as can a reasonable layperson. He concluded that saying yes has done the
City good. 

Councilmember Oliver Davis began by clarifying that the May Oberfell Lorber decision did not
come before Council and was,  in fact, an administrative decision. He was thankful for the
extension of the discussion of the PUD, stating that he felt there was an attempt to squash this
discussion. Any less time, he argued, would mean that Council could not make a sound decision. 
He stated that this gave Council the chance to carefully review plans and examine the very need
for reviewing them. He stated that there were gaps in these plans. He stated that this discussion
exposed the fact that the City was unable to keep the promise it made in the East Bank Plan of
2008 to build garages by 2016. He stated that the City has a responsibility to honor promises
made in plans. He further stated that the Council should know that there is not City money in- 
place ahead of time. He asked how the City could expect developers to honor their promises if
the City could not itself do so.  He argued that it was not fair to Dave Matthews, and that the City
should be capable of being creative so as to fund these projects. He explained that he voted to
raise taxes in 2008 to help ensure that funding would be at a level that could prevent South Bend
residents from being impacted by what was going on in the State.  He stated to Councilmember
Ferlic that that was why Council has been able to say yes for the past eight ( 8)  years.  He stated
that he was shocked that the City' s financial experts did not plan such that higher taxes would
lead to more robust funding. He concluded that the project' s height should be set at sixty -seven
67)  feet, and that the City should pay for the garage. 

Councilmember John Voorde stated that this process belonged in front of the Council. He
declared that he would be voting against the bill because the height of one - hundred and seventy - 
five ( 175)  feet was too high for that area. He stated, though, that an argument could be made that
the Island between the race and the river is considered distinct from what is east of the race to
Niles Avenue. He stated that the garage was key. He explained that the PUD is a tool for
expediting development and that the PUD process was a public one.  He argued that plans —being
good guideposts —were better when they included stakeholders in the plan - writing process than
when they were paid for. He stated that economic realities must be considered:  the lack of
development in the East Bank was not anyone' s fault, but rather the result of the Great
Recession. He concluded that, with the help of experts, a better compromise could be arrived at
regarding the PUD. 

Councilmember Tim Scott stated that it was a travesty that the process had gone on for so long. 
He stated that there would be talks with DCI and the Mayor' s Office. He stated that after eight
8)  years,  nothing has come out of the East Bank Plan. Part of the problem, he explained, was
that he did not see the east and west of the river as distinct but the plan did. He stated that though
there existed a general urge to change South Bend, there has often been a buck against change

25

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

when new opportunities arrive. He asked, Who is trying to be creative and match up these plans? 
He concluded that he was in favor of the bill, as it was a private development that required no
City dollars. He added that he wanted to make a motion for an amendment to the bill when the
time came. 

Councilmember Karen White stated that she was in agreement with a number of
Councilmembers'  comments.  She stated that she had not met anyone who was against the
project—that only the height was an issue.  She stated that there must be some respect for the
planning process, otherwise it becomes difficult to determine with consistency what projects are
appropriate and worthy of approval.  She stated, To me, it appears that we are planning as we go
based on what we believe is important for the City. She stated that she was still hopeful that there
would be a compromise.  She suggested that plans should be reviewed yearly. She stated that the
City pays thousands of dollars to bring in consultants to develop a plan only to have the plan sit
on the shelf. She stated that while one department may treat a plan as policy, another might treat
it as a practice —and this was not fair to the developer.  She asked, Do we go ahead and approve
it and hope that compromise occurs? Or do we work towards that so that what comes before this
Council is the very best one can give to us?  She stated that she was hopeful that Council and Mr. 
Matthews would meet the June 2017 deadline,  and that a compromise would be reached. 

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to amend Bill No. 41 -16 to change the proposed height
to one - hundred and fifty -one ( 15 1) 
requirement. Councilmember Dr. Varner seconded the motion which was defeated by a roll call
vote of five (5)  nays and four (4)  ayes ( Councilmembers Randy Kelly, Dr. David Varner, Gavin
Ferlic, and Tim Scott). 

feet, as well as to not hold the PUD to any square footage

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to send Bill No.  41 - 16 to the Full Council with an
unfavorable recommendation and Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion, which
carried by a roll call vote of six (6)  ayes and three ( 3)  nays ( Councilmembers Randy Kelly, 
Gavin Ferlic, and Tim Scott). 

RISE AND REPORT

Councilmember Oliver Davis made a motion to rise and report to full Council. Councilmember
Dr. David Varner seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

REGULAR MEETING RECONVENED

Be it remembered that the Common Council of the City of South Bend reconvened in the
Council Chambers on the fourth floor of the County -City building at 11: 14 p.m. Council
President Tim Scott presided with nine ( 9)  members present

BILLS – THIRD READING

41 -16

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING
ORDINANCE FOR PROPERTY LOCATED AT
401 EAST COLFAX AVENUE, 228 &  230
SYCAMORE STREET, &  312 LASALLE
AVENUE, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 4
IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to defeat Bill No. 41 - 16 and Councilmember Jo
Broden seconded the motion, which carried by a roll call vote of five (5)  ayes and four (4)  nays
Councilmembers Randy Kelly, Gavin Ferlic, Dr. David Varner, and Tim Scott). 

26

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

66 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA AMENDING
VARIOUS SECTIONS OF THE SOUTH BEND

MUNICIPAL CODE AT CHAPTER 17, 

ARTICLES 4 AND 6 TO ADDRESS NEW
WATER RATES AND CHARGES

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to continue Bill No.  66 -16 until January 9th,  2017 and
Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of nine ( 9) 

ayes. 

73 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, AMENDING

CHAPTER 2,  ARTICLE 14 OF THE SOUTH

BEND MUNICIPAL CODE TO ESTABLISH

VARIOUS NEW FUNDS:  LOCAL ROAD AND

BRIDGE MATCHING GRANT FUND (265), 

EQUIPMENT/ VEHICLE LEASING FUND ( 750), 

PARKS BOND CAPITAL FUND ( 751),  SOUTH

BEND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FUND

752),  SMART STREETS BOND CAPITAL

FUND ( 753),  INDUSTRIAL REVOLVING FUND

754),  SOUTH BEND BUILDING

CORPORATION FUND ( 755),  SMART STREETS

DEBT SERVICE FUND ( 756),  PARKS BOND

DEBT SERVICE FUND ( 757),  THE ERSKINE

VILLAGE DEBT SERVICE FUND ( 758),  AND

CHANGING THE NAME OF FUND 279 TO THE

IT /INNOVATION /311 CALL CENTER FUND

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to pass Bill No.  73 - 16 and Councilmember Oliver
Davis seconded the motion, which carried by a roll call vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

74 -16

27

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF

THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF

SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, APPROPRIATING

ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR CERTAIN

DEPARTMENTAL AND ENTERPRISE

OPERATIONS IN 2016 OF $ 220, 000 FROM

CONSOLIDATED BUILDING FUND ( #600), 

120, 000 FROM SOLID WASTE FUND ( #610), 

5, 000 FROM WATER WORKS CUSTOMER

DEPOSIT FUND ( #624), $ 4, 000 FROM WATER

WORKS SINKING FUND (#625),$ 5, 000 FROM

WATER WORKS BOND RESERVE FUND

626), $ 11, 000 FROM WATER WORKS DEBT

RESERVE O &M FUND ( #629), $ 45, 000 FROM

SEWER INSURANCE FUND ( #640), $ 22, 000

FROM SEWAGE WORKS O & M RESERVE

FUND ( #643), $ 5 FROM 2015 SEWER BOND

ISSUANCE FUND ( #666),  AND $346, 506 FROM
CENTURY CENTER FUND ( #670). 

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to pass Bill No.  74 -16 and Councilmember John
Voorde seconded the motion, which carried by a roll call vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

75 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, FOR BUDGET

TRANSFERS FOR VARIOUS DEPARTMENTS

WITHIN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, 

INDIANA FOR THE YEAR 2016

Councilmember Jo Broden made a motion to accept Substitute Bill No. 75 -16 and
Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of nine ( 9) 

ayes. 

Councilmember Gavin Ferlic made a motion to pass Substitute Bill No.  75 -16 and
Councilmember Jo Broden seconded the motion, which carried by a roll call vote of nine ( 9) 

ayes. 

76 -16

THIRD READING ON AN ORDINANCE OF
THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, APPROPRIATING
ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR CERTAIN

DEPARTMENTAL AND CITY SERVICES

OPERATIONS IN 2016 OF $ 364, 100 FROM
GENERAL FUND (# 101), $ 25, 000 FROM
UNSAFE BUILDING FUND (#219),$ 25, 000
FROM LOCAL ROADS &  STREETS FUND

251), $ 150, 000 FROM LOIT 2016 SPECIAL

DISTRIBUTION FUND ( #257), $ 10, 000 FROM
INDIANA RIVER RESCUE FUND ( #291), 

212, 542 FROM COPS MORE GRANT FUND
295), $ 150, 000 FROM COUNTY OPTION
INCOME TAX FUND ( #404)  AND $100, 000
FROM PARKS NONREVERTING CAPITAL
FUND ( #405). 

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to pass Bill No. 76 -16 and Councilmember Gavin
Ferlic seconded the motion, which carried by a roll call vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

RESOLUTIONS

16 -85

28

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND
DESIGNATING CERTAIN AREAS WITHIN THE
CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA, 
COMMONLY KNOWN AS 23464 ADAMS
ROAD,  SOUTH BEND, IN 46628 AN
ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA FOR
PURPOSES OF A (9)  NINE -YEAR REAL
PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT FOR
PORTAGE PRAIRIE, LLC

GLC

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to continue Bill No.  16 -85 to January 9th,  2017 and
Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of nine
9)  ayes. 

16 -89

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, 

APPROVING A PETITION OF THE AREA
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS FOR THE

PROPERTY LOCATED AT LOTS 2 AND 3

COVELESKI PARK MINOR SUBDIVISION

SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA 46601

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to continue Bill No.  16 -89 to January 9th,  2017 and
Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of nine
9)  ayes. 

16 -90

A RESOLUTION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL

OF THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA, 

REQUESTING PROGRESS REPORTS TO BE

GIVEN ANNUALLY TO THE ZONING AND

ANNEXATION COMMITTEE ON EACH

NEIGHBORHOOD AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to continue Bill No.  16 -90 to January 9th,  2017 and
Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a voice vote of nine
9)  ayes. 

BILLS FIRST READING

77 -16

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE

AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR

PROPERTY LOCATED AT 3720 LINCOLNWAY

WEST, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO. 2 IN

THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND,  INDIANA

Councilmember John Voorde made a motion to send Bill No. 77 -16 to the Area Plan
Commission and the Zoning and Annexation Committee, and to set public hearing for January
23rd,  2017. Councilmember Oliver Davis seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of
nine ( 9)  ayes. 

FIRST READING ON AN ORDINANCE

AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR

PROPERTY LOCATED AT A 119. 89 ACRE

TRACT OF LAND NEAR THE CORNER OF

MAYFLOWER ROAD AND ADAMS ROAD

ABUTTING THE ST.  JOSEPH VALLEY

PARKWAY, COUNCILMANIC DISTRICT NO.  1
IN THE CITY OF SOUTH BEND, INDIANA

78 -16

W

REGULAR MEETING

December 12,  2016

Councilmember Karen White made a motion to send Bill No.  78 -16 to the Area Plan
Commission and the Zoning and Annexation Committee, and to set public hearing for January
23rd, 2017. Councilmember John Voorde seconded the motion which carried by a voice vote of
nine ( 9)  ayes. 

UNFINISHED BUSINESS

APPEAL OF A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR 1240 W. THOMAS STREET
BOYD VS. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION

Councilmember Tim Scott made a motion to continue the Appeal of a Certificate of
Appropriateness for 1240 W. Thomas Street -Boyd vs.  Historic Preservation Commission until
January 23,  2017 and Councilmember Dr. David Varner seconded the motion, which carried by a
voice vote of nine ( 9)  ayes. 

NEW BUSINESS

There was no new business. 

PRIVILEGE OF THE FLOOR

Samuel Brown, 222 East Navarre Street,  South Bend, IN, addressed the homeless issue in the
City. He stated that moving them from one place to another does not solve the problem. He
stated, I just hope that somebody takes the time to find out a solution to the endgame, because
these people need help. 

ADJOURNMENT

There being no further business to come before the Council, President Tim Scott adjourned the
meeting at 11: 26 p.m. 

c

